Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025 Cover Page
Action Mapping for Reinforcement Learning in
Continuous Environments with Constraints
Mirco Theile, Lukas Dirnberger, Raphael Trumpp, Marco Caccamo,
Alberto L. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli
Keywords: Action masking, constrained MDPs, continuous action space, deep reinforcement
learning
Summary
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has had success across various domains, but applying
it to environments with constraints remains challenging due to poor sample efficiency and
slow convergence. Recent literature explored incorporating model knowledge to mitigate these
problems, particularly using models that assess the feasibility of proposed actions. However,
integrating feasibility models efficiently into DRL pipelines in environments with continuous
action spaces is non-trivial. We propose a novel DRL training strategy utilizing action mapping
that leverages feasibility models to streamline the learning process. By decoupling the learning
of feasible actions from policy optimization, action mapping allows DRL agents to focus on
selecting the optimal action from a reduced feasible action set. We demonstrate that action
mapping significantly improves training performance in two constrained environments with
continuous action spaces, especially with imperfect feasibility models.
Contribution(s)
1. In this paper, we develop and implement the action mapping (AM) framework for DRL to
efficiently incorporate feasibility models during training. In AM, the training is split into
two steps. First, a feasibility policy is trained to generate all feasible actions given a state
by leveraging the feasibility model. Second, an objective policy learns to select the optimal
action among these pretrained feasible actions.
Context: The AM framework was originally conceptualized by Theile et al. (2024). How-
ever, they only focussed on the feasibility policy, omitting the objective policy and thus
leaving its practical benefits in DRL unexplored. In this paper, we refine their feasibility
policy training and formulate the training procedure for the objective policy.
2. Using perfect and approximate feasibility models with AM-PPO and AM-SAC implementa-
tions, we demonstrate AM’s effectiveness in constrained environments. Empirical compari-
son with Lagrangian methods and action replacement, resampling, and projection highlights
superior performance, especially with approximate models.
Context: While action replacement, resampling, and projection utilize the feasibility mod-
els, the Lagrangian methods are model-free and thus have an innate disadvantage. However,
they were added to also compare with model-free approaches.
3. Additionally, we showcase AM’s ability to express multi-modal action distributions, en-
hancing exploration and learning performance.
Context: Commonly, the output of a DRL policy is parameterizing a single-mode Gaus-
sian, which can be disadvantageous when there are disconnected sets of feasible actions.
AM allows the agent to effectively produce multi-mode Gaussians in the action space, al-
lowing it to explore actions in disconnected sets of feasible actions.
Action Mapping for Reinforcement Learning in Continuous Environments with Constraints
Action Mapping for Reinforcement Learning in
Continuous Environments with Constraints
Mirco Theile1, Lukas Dirnberger1, Raphael Trumpp1, Marco Caccamo1,
Alberto L. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli2
{mirco.theile,lukas.dirnberger,raphael.trumpp,mcaccamo}@tum.de,
alberto@berkeley.edu
1TUM School of Engineering and Design, Technical University of Munich, Germany
2Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, USA
Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has had success across various domains, but ap-
plying it to environments with constraints remains challenging due to poor sample ef-
ficiency and slow convergence. Recent literature explored incorporating model knowl-
edge to mitigate these problems, particularly using models that assess the feasibil-
ity of proposed actions. However, integrating feasibility models efficiently into DRL
pipelines in environments with continuous action spaces is non-trivial. We propose a
novel DRL training strategy utilizing action mapping that leverages feasibility mod-
els to streamline the learning process. By decoupling the learning of feasible actions
from policy optimization, action mapping allows DRL agents to focus on selecting the
optimal action from a reduced feasible action set. We demonstrate that action map-
ping significantly improves training performance in two constrained environments with
continuous action spaces, especially with imperfect feasibility models.
1 Introduction
Deep Reinforcement learning (DRL) has emerged as a powerful tool across numerous application
domains, ranging from robotics (Funk et al., 2022) and autonomous system (Trumpp et al., 2024)
to game-playing (Vinyals et al., 2019) and other decision-making tasks (Bayerlein et al., 2021).
The ability of DRL to learn complex behaviors through trial and error makes it highly promising
for solving challenging problems. Despite the potential of DRL, its application is limited by poor
sample efficiency and challenges in handling constraints that frequently arise in real-world tasks.
Such constraints, such as safety requirements or physical limits, complicate the exploration and
learning processes (Achiam et al., 2017).
In many constrained environments, it is essential to prevent the agent from selecting actions that
could violate certain constraints. Therefore, it has been proposed to utilize feasibility models that
assess the feasibility of proposed actions at a given state. Their application is straightforward in
discrete action spaces, where infeasible actions can simply be masked out, preventing the agent from
choosing them (Huang & Ontañón, 2020). Action masking has been successfully applied in various
discrete action space problems, such as vehicle routing (Nazari et al., 2018), autonomous driving
scenarios (Krasowski et al., 2020), and task scheduling (Sun et al., 2024). However, integrating
feasibility models becomes significantly more challenging in continuous action spaces, as actions
cannot be directly masked out.
Several methods have been proposed for integrating feasibility models in continuous action spaces.
Action replacement substitutes infeasible actions with predefined feasible ones (Srinivasan et al.,
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
2020), while action resampling rejects invalid actions and samples new ones until a feasible ac-
tion is found (Bharadhwaj et al., 2020). Another approach is action projection, which projects the
agent’s chosen action onto the nearest feasible one (Cheng et al., 2019). While these methods of-
fer solutions, they often introduce inefficiencies or increase the computational cost of learning and
decision-making, particularly in complex environments.
Inspired by the simplicity of action masking in discrete action spaces, Theile et al. (2024) proposed
action mapping, a framework to address inefficiencies when incorporating feasibility models in con-
tinuous action spaces. In their framework, a feasibility policy is pretrained to generate all feasible
actions by leveraging the feasibility model. This feasibility policy creates a state-dependent repre-
sentation of feasible actions, enabling an objective policy to focus solely on optimizing the task’s
objective. While this concept shows promise, Theile et al. (2024) only focussed on the feasibility
policy, omitting the objective policy and thus leaving its practical benefits in DRL unexplored. In this
paper, we refine their feasibility policy training and formulate the training procedure for the objective
policy. We further demonstrate its implementation in safe RL, achieving significant improvements
in both sample efficiency and constraint satisfaction compared to other safe RL methods.
Importantly, our focus is not on ensuring guaranteed constraint satisfaction. Instead, the primary
objective is to leverage prior knowledge encapsulated in (potentially imperfect) feasibility models
as an inductive bias to accelerate and improve the performance of DRL training. To that end, we
test our approach in two constrained environments: (i) A robotic arm end-effector pose positioning
task with obstacles using a perfect feasibility model, and (ii) a path planning environment with con-
stant velocity and non-holonomic constraints, for which an approximate feasibility model is used.
The experiments show that our action mapping approach outperforms Lagrangian approaches (Ha
et al., 2020; Ray et al., 2019) and an action projection approach, especially in scenarios with an
approximate feasibility model.
Our work bridges the gap between the conceptual framework of action mapping and its practical
implementation in constrained environments, leading to the following contributions:
• Development and implementation of the action mapping framework for DRL to efficiently incor-
porate feasibility models during training.1
• Demonstration of action mapping’s (AM) effectiveness in constrained environments using perfect
and approximate feasibility models with AM-PPO and AM-SAC implementations.
• Empirical comparison with Lagrangian methods and action replacement, resampling, and projec-
tion, highlighting superior performance, especially with approximate models.
• Showcasing action mapping’s ability to express multi-modal action distributions, enhancing ex-
ploration and learning performance.
2 Preliminaries
2.1 State-wise Constrained Markov Decision Process
A state-wise constrained Markov Decision Process (SCMDP) (Zhao et al., 2023) can be defined
through the tuple (S, A, R, {Ci}∀i, P, γ, S0, μ), in which S and A are the state and action space.
The reward function R : S × A → R defines the immediate reward received for performing a
specific action in a given state. A transition function P : S × A → P(S) describes the stochastic
evolution of the system, with P(S) defining a probability distribution over the state space. The
discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1] weighs the importance of immediate and future rewards. Additionally, a
set of initial states S0 and an initial state distribution μ = P(S0) are provided. When following a
stochastic policy π : S → P(A), the expected discounted cumulative reward is defined as
J(π) = E
" ∞X
t=0
γtR(st, at) | s0 ∼ μ, at ∼ π(·|st), st+1 ∼ P(·|st, at)
#
. (1)
1The code for AM-SAC and AM-PPO with the environments is available at github.com/theilem/drl_am.
Action Mapping for Reinforcement Learning in Continuous Environments with Constraints
In contrast to a regular MDP (Sutton, 2018), in an SCMDP, a set of cost functions {Ci}∀i is defined,
in which Ci : S × A × S → R, such that every transition is associated with a cost value. In a
CMDP (Altman, 2021), the expected discounted cumulative cost for each cost function Ci needs
to be bounded by a wi ∈ R. In an SCMDP, the cost functions are required to be bounded for
each transition individually, which is a stricter constraint. With all possible trajectories τ π (s) when
following π starting from a state s, the SCMDP optimization problem is formulated as
π∗ = arg max
π∈Π J(π)
s.t. Ci(st, at, st+1) ≤ wi, ∀i, ∀(st, at, st+1) ∼ τ π (s0), ∀s0 ∈ S0. (2)
The optimization requires that each cost function Ci is bounded by wi for each transition
(st, at, st+1) ∼ τ π (s0) along all possible trajectories of π starting from all possible initial states
in S0.
2.2 Feasibility Models
Given the individual cost functions for a transition, a joint cost function can be defined as
C(st, at, st+1) = X
∀i
max {0; Ci(st, at, st+1) − wi} , (3)
which is 0 if no cost function exceeds its bound and otherwise the sum of the violations. With the
joint cost function, a policy-dependent trajectory cost can be defined as
Cτ (s; π) = max
(st,at,st+1)∼τ π (s) C(st, at, st+1) (4)
that expresses the highest joint cost of any transition (st, at, st+1) along all possible trajectories,
starting from some s and following π. It is 0 if no cost function exceeds its bound.
A feasibility model G : S × A → R defines the cost violation of the transition induced by applying
action at at state st, plus the cost violation of the most feasible policy from the next state. Formally,
we define it as
G(st, at) = max
st+1∼P(·|st,at)

C(st, at, st+1) + min
π∈Π Cτ (st+1; π)

, (5)
with the maximization over all possible next states. A Boolean version of the feasibility model
g : S × A → B can be defined as
g(st, at) = (G(st, at) == 0), (6)
where “==” denotes Boolean equality. It indicates whether all possible transitions induced by at
at st are feasible and whether a policy exists such that a cost violation can be avoided from any
possible st+1.
3 Related Research
The majority of the safe RL literature focuses on discrete actions through action masking (Huang
& Ontañón, 2020), often through shielding (Alshiekh et al., 2018). Action projection is usually
proposed to incorporate feasibility models for continuous action spaces. Donti et al. (2021) propose
DC3 to perform action projection through gradient descent on a feasibility model, while Cheng et al.
(2019) use control barrier functions. When the feasible action space is known and can be described
as a convex polytope, a limiting assumption, Stolz et al. (2024) introduce a similar concept to action
mapping that also improves performance.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
Learning-based approaches incorporate constraints directly into the RL process, often using tech-
niques like Lagrangian optimization or dual frameworks. CMDPs (Altman, 2021) introduce cu-
mulative cost constraints, while Constrained Policy Optimization (CPO) Achiam et al. (2017) ex-
tends trust-region policy optimization by ensuring monotonic improvement under safety constraints.
Bharadhwaj et al. (2020) propose conservative safety critics that reject unsafe actions during explo-
ration and resamples from the actor, while Srinivasan et al. (2020) replaces the unsafe action with
a null action. Penalized PPO (P30) (Zhang et al., 2022) further incorporates constraint penalties,
and Lagrangian PPO (Ray et al., 2019) and feasible actor-critic (Ma et al., 2021) use Lagrangian
multipliers to balance reward maximization and constraint satisfaction.
Combining model-based and learning approaches, learned feasibility models are often used to per-
form action projection. Dalal et al. (2018) learn a linear approximation of the cost function and
perform action projection using the linear model. Chow et al. (2019) learn a Lyapunov function and
perform action or parameter projection. Zhang et al. (2023) use DC3 with a learned safety critic,
using it for iterative gradient descent-based action projection. Further approaches to safe RL can be
found in surveys by Gu et al. (2022b) and Zhao et al. (2023).
While recent works have primarily focused on action projection methods when incorporating feasi-
bility models, we propose a novel method that describes a mapping instead of a projection, which
we show can improve learning performance.
Besides the safe RL perspective, action mapping is also related to the research in action representa-
tion learning. In action representation, a continuous latent action representation of large (discrete)
action spaces is learned (Chandak et al., 2019). It has been extended to learn representation of se-
quences of actions (Whitney et al., 2020), mixed discrete and continuous actions (Li et al., 2022), or
specifically for offline RL (Gu et al., 2022a). Action mapping can be thought of as finding an action
representation for the state-dependent set of feasible actions.
4 Action Mapping Methodology
Figure 1: Architecture of action mapping,
showing how a perfect feasibility policy πf
transforms the constrained MDP with P and
action space A into an unconstrained MDP
with Pf and action space Z.
If a feasibility model g from (6) can be derived for an
environment, the question is how to use it efficiently
in RL. The intuition of action mapping is to first learn
all feasible actions through interactions with g and
subsequently train a policy through interactions with
the environment to choose the best action among the
feasible ones. By allowing the objective policy to
choose only among feasible actions, the SCMDP is
effectively transformed into an unconstrained MDP,
as illustrated in Fig. 1. Since unconstrained MDPs
are generally easier to solve than SCMDPs–primarily
due to reduced exploration complexity–action map-
ping can drastically improve training performance. In
the following, the time index is dropped from st and
at for improved readability.
Formally, given g, the state-dependent set of feasible actions A+
s ⊆ A contains all actions for which
g(s, a) = 1. To learn all feasible actions, a feasibility policy is defined as
πf : S × Z → A+
s , (7)
which is a generator that generates feasible actions for a given state. The latent space Z, with the
same cardinality as the action space A, allows the policy πf to generate multiple feasible actions for
the same state. A perfect feasibility policy is a state-dependent surjective map from Z to A+
s , as it
is able to generate all feasible actions without generating infeasible ones. With a perfect feasibility
policy, the latent space Z is an action representation of the set of feasible actions.
Action Mapping for Reinforcement Learning in Continuous Environments with Constraints
Given a feasibility policy πf , an objective policy
πo : S → P(Z) (8)
can be trained to find the state-dependent optimal latent value distribution. Through the map πf , the
overall policy
π = πf ◦ πo : S → P(A+
s ) (9)
thus learns the optimal distribution over the feasible actions.
Fig. 1 shows the action mapping architecture. It illustrates that a perfect feasibility policy πf trans-
forms the state-wise constrained environment with transition function P into an unconstrained envi-
ronment with transition function Pf with action space Z. The following describes how to train the
feasibility and objective policies.
4.1 Feasibility Policy
To train the feasibility policy, we use the approach from Theile et al. (2024). The parameterized
feasibility policy πθ
f with parameters θ aims to be a state-dependent surjective map from the latent
space Z to the set of feasible actions A+
s , to allow the objective policy to choose among all feasible
actions. When sampling z ∼ U(Z), i.e., uniformly from the latent space, πθ
f becomes a generator
with a conditional probability density function (pdf) qθ (a|s). Since πθ
f is task-independent, this
generator should generate all feasible actions equally likely without any bias toward any specific
feasible action. Therefore, the target of qθ (a|s) is a uniform distribution in the feasible action space,
i.e., U(A+
s ).
This uniform target distribution is given through the feasibility model g as
p(a|s) = g(s, a)
Z(s) , with Z(s) =
Z
A
g(s, a′)da′ (10)
where Z(s) is a partition function, effectively indicating the volume of feasible actions given a state.
The objective of the feasibility policy is then minθ D(p(·|s)||qθ (·|s)), with a divergence measure D.
Since qθ and p are not available in closed form, both need to be approximated. The distribution of
the policy can be approximated through a kernel density estimate (KDE) based on N samples from
qθ (·|s) as
ˆqθ
σ (a|s) = 1
N
X
ai∼qθ (·|s)
kσ (a − ai), (11)
with a kernel k with bandwidth σ. To explore the feasibility of actions outside the support of qθ ,
Gaussian noise is added to the sampled actions as
a∗
i = ai + ϵi, ϵi ∼ N (0, σ′), (12)
which is equivalent to sampling from the KDE with bandwidth σ′ as a∗
i ∼ ˆqθ
σ′ (·|s). Theile et al.
(2024) propose to sample multiple actions per support point of the KDE, which our experiments
showed to be unnecessary. The distribution ˆqθ
σ′ with σ′ ≥ σ is a proposal distribution used for the
divergence estimate. Using these samples, the target distribution can be estimated as
ˆp(a|s) = g(s, a)
ˆZ(s) , with ˆZ(s) = 1
N
X
a∗
i ∼ˆqθ
σ′ (·|s)
g(s, a∗
i )
ˆqθ
σ′ (a∗
i |s) , (13)
where the partition function is approximated using Monte-Carlo importance sampling. Using the
approximation ˆqθ
σ , the samples a∗
i from the proposal distribution ˆqθ
σ′ , and the approximation of the
target distribution ˆp, the gradient of the Jensen-Shannon divergence can be approximated as
∂
∂θ DJS(p || qθ ) ≈ 1
2N
X
a∗
i ∼ˆqθ
σ′
ˆqθ
σ (a∗
i )
ˆqθ
σ′ (a∗
i ) log
 2ˆqθ
σ (a∗
i )
ˆp(a∗
i ) + ˆqθ
σ (a∗
i )
 ∂
∂θ log ˆqθ
σ (a∗
i ), (14)
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
dropping the dependency on s for readability. Theile et al. (2024) showed the Jensen-Shannon
divergence yields the best compromise between reaching all actions, even in disconnected sets of
feasible actions, and minimizing the probability of generating infeasible actions. An algorithm and
implementation details in the context of DRL are provided in Appendix A.
4.2 Objective Policy
Algorithm 1 AM Training Procedure
1: Initialize πϕ
o , and Qψ (AM-SAC) or Vψ (AM-PPO)
2: Initialize buffer D ← {}
3: Load or pretrain πθ
f using Algorithm 2
4: s ← env.reset()
5: for 1 to Interaction Steps do
6: μ, σ ← πϕ
o (s) ▷ Get policy parameters
7: x ∼ N (·|μ, σ) ▷ Sample from Gaussian
8: z ← tanh(x) ▷ Squash into latent space
9: a ← πθ
f (s, z) ▷ Map to action space
10: ˆVs ← Vψ (s) ▷ for AM-PPO
11: logπ ← log N (x|μ, σ) − log(1 − z2) ▷ for AM-PPO
12: s′, r, d ← env.step(a)
13: D ← D ∪
(
(s, z, r, s′, d), for AM-SAC
(s, z, logπ, ˆVs, r, s′, d), for AM-PPO
14: s ← s′ if ¬d else env.reset()
15: if D is ready for training then
16: if AM-SAC then πϕ
o , Qψ ← SAC train step
17: if AM-PPO then πϕ
o , Vψ ← PPO train epoch, D ← {}
Algorithm 1 shows our pro-
posed training procedure for
AM-SAC based on Soft Actor-Critc
(SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) and
AM-PPO using Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) (Achiam et al.,
2017). For both algorithms, the
objective policy πϕ
o parameterizes
a Gaussian from which a value x
is sampled (lines 6-7). Since the
Gaussian is not bounded, we squash
it using a tanh yielding the latent
value z (line 8). The latent z is
then mapped to an action a using
πϕ
f (line 9). If using AM-PPO,
the state-value estimate ˆVs and
the log-likelihood of the latent are
gathered (lines 10-11). For the
log-likelihood, a term is added to
compensate for the squashing effect.
Using the action a, the environment steps to the next state s′, yielding reward r and a termination
flag d (line 12), and the collected experience tuples are stored in the buffer D (line 13). The
experience tuples do not contain the action a but solely the latent z.
When the buffer is full (AM-PPO) or the buffer has sufficient samples for a batch (AM-SAC), the
agent is trained (line 15). For AM-SAC, a standard SAC training step is performed in which the
critic is updated to estimate the state-latent value, and the actor maximizes the critic’s output with
an added entropy term (line 16). For AM-PPO (line 17), the agent is trained on the full buffer as
done in PPO, with the critic updated to predict the state value and the actor through standard policy
optimization on the latent distribution. In AM-PPO, the buffer is reset after training.
In principle, πθ
o could be trained on the actions a instead of the latent z. However, this leads to prob-
lems in AM-PPO and AM-SAC. In AM-PPO, it would be challenging to estimate the log-likelihood
of an action a given the log-likelihood of latent z. While πϕ
f is trained to map uniformly into the
set of feasible actions, it is neither perfect nor strictly bijective, and the log-likelihood for a would
require approximations, e.g., through KDEs. This is costly and likely creates ill-posed gradients for
the training of πθ
o . In AM-SAC, if training Qψ (s, a), the policy gradient for πθ
o could propagate
through πϕ
f . While this is tractable, Qψ (s, a) is not trained on infeasible actions and thus likely
yields arbitrary gradients near the feasibility border, preventing πθ
o from jumping between discon-
nected sets of feasible actions. Additionally, the entropy in the action space is difficult to assess,
similar to the log-likelihood. Preliminary experiments on training AM-SAC on a, with entropy in
the latent space, showed no advantage compared with standard SAC training.
Consequently, training πθ
o and, in AM-SAC, Qψ on the latent space is more straightforward to
implement and yields better results. A primary advantage of training on the latent space is that
disconnected sets of feasible actions are very close in the latent space, allowing policy gradient and
policy optimization algorithms to jump between the sets. Additionally, a single modal Gaussian
in the latent space can be mapped to a multi-modal distribution in the action space, allowing for
Action Mapping for Reinforcement Learning in Continuous Environments with Constraints
better exploration and decreasing the chance of being trapped in local optima. Fig. 5 highlights and
discusses the exploration benefit. Overall, as shown in Fig. 1, the idea is to convert the SCMDP into
an unconstrained MDP. Therefore, from the perspective of πθ
o and Qψ , the environment is given by
Pf (s′|s, z) = P(s′|s, πf (s, z)).
5 Experiment Setup
5.1 Applications
We define two different RL environments, shown in Figs. 2 and 3, with continuous state and action
spaces to demonstrate how action mapping can be implemented and to evaluate its performance
compared with common approaches. The first experiment is a robotic arm end-effector pose tracking
task with multiple obstacles. This task was designed so that a perfect feasibility model can be derived
and a feasible null action exists. The second experiment is a path planning problem with constant
velocity and non-holonomic constraints, which can be found using fixed-wing aircraft. Since a
fixed-wing aircraft cannot stop or turn around instantaneously, deriving a perfect feasibility model
is extremely challenging. Therefore, we utilize that environment to showcase action mapping’s
performance using approximate feasibility models. In both environments, the episode is terminated
when a constraint is violated, which exacerbates the challenge for DRL.
5.1.1 Robotic Arm End-effector Pose
Figure 2: Robotic arm end-effector pose
environment with obstacles in gray and
the target pose to the left.
In this environment, visualized in Fig. 2, the agent is a
purely kinematic robot arm, neglecting inertia, loosely
replicating a 7 DOF Franka Research 3 robotic arm
(Franka-Robotics, 2024). Given a starting pose, the agent
needs to move the joints such that its end-effector reaches
a target pose without colliding with obstacles. The obsta-
cles are represented by spheres, and the collision shape of
the robot arm is defined by a series of capsules that can be
seen as a pessimistic safety hull. The obstacles are sam-
pled using rejection sampling to avoid intersections with
the start and end configuration.
State space. The state contains the 7 joint angles of the robot arm, the target pose (rotation +
translation from the origin), and the parameters of up to 20 spherical obstacles.
Action space. The action is defined as a delta of the joint angles.
Constraints. The agent is not allowed to exceed its joint limits or predefined maximum cartesian
velocities of each joint. No part of the robot arm is allowed to collide with any of the obstacles.
Reward function. The reward function is a weighted sum of the decrement of the distance and
angle of the end-effector pose to the target pose.
Feasibility model. The feasibility model performs a one-step prediction and evaluates the constraint
functions on joint limits, joint Euclidean velocities, and obstacle collision.
In this scenario, the feasibility model is perfect, and a feasible replacement action exists (no move-
ment). We train different PPO configurations and compare their performance in the next section.
5.1.2 Non-holonomic Path Planning with Constant Velocity
This environment contains an agent that needs to collect targets while avoiding obstacles. The agent
can be thought of as a fixed-wing aircraft that needs to maintain a constant velocity, and its turns
cannot exceed a maximum curvature. The airplane in Fig. 3 is for visualization purposes only; the
agent’s dimensions are assumed to be integrated into the obstacles.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
Figure 3: Spline-based path planning
environment with constant velocity and
non-holonomic constraints.
State space. The state space contains 30 randomly sam-
pled rectangular obstacles and 10 randomly placed and
sized circular targets. Additionally, the agent has a posi-
tion and current velocity.
Action space. The agent parameterizes 2D cubic Bezier
curves, which are anchored at the agent’s position and
starting in the agent’s current direction, yielding a 5D ac-
tion space. The splines are followed for a constant time,
after which a new spline is generated by the agent.
Constraints. The agent is not allowed to collide with any
obstacle or leave the squared area. While following the
spline for a constant following time, the induced curva-
ture must not exceed a curvature bound, and the agent
must not reach the end of the spline.
Reward function. The agent receives a reward of 0.1
when a target is collected and an additional reward of 1.0
when all targets are collected.
Feasibility model. The approximate feasibility model generates 64 points along the spline and
locally assesses collisions with obstacles, whether a point is out of bounds, and whether the local
curvature exceeds the curvature bound. Additionally, it adds the Euclidean distances between the
points to estimate the length of the spline. The spline length needs to be within length bounds.
The idea behind the spline-based action space is to express a multi-step action with reduced dimen-
sionality. Through this multi-step action, the feasibility model can assess whether a feasible path
exists within a time horizon, effectively expressing a short horizon policy that minimizes the future
trajectory cost in the second term of (5). Therefore, the minimum length of the generated spline
for the feasibility model is set to a multiple of the distance traveled per time step (a factor of 2.5
in this experiment). The maximum length of a spline is defined to bound the action space (3.5 in
the experiment), yielding a look-ahead of around two timesteps. We train different SAC configu-
rations and compare their performance in the next section. Our neural network architectures and
hyperparameters for these environments are presented in Appendix B.
5.2 Comparison
Given a feasibility model G from (5) or its Boolean-valued version g from (6), the three common
approaches to utilize it are action replacement, resampling, and projection. These approaches are
described in more detail in Appendix C.1. They each offer distinct trade-offs in terms of compu-
tational cost and feasibility guarantees, and our experiments explore their performance in different
settings.
Additionally to these methods utilizing feasibility models, we compare with model-free Lagrangian
methods “Lagrangian SAC” (Ha et al., 2020) and “Lagrangian PPO” (Ray et al., 2019). In these
methods, a safety critic is trained to estimate the expected cumulative cost or, in our case, the ex-
pected probability of constraint violation, and a policy aims to maximize a Lagrangian dual problem.
The two algorithms are described in more detail in Appendix C.2.
6 Results
6.1 Robot Arm
To demonstrate the training performance in the robotic arm environment, Figs. 4a and 4b show the
cumulative return and constraint violations throughout training. It can be seen that the baseline PPO
agent learns robustly, continuously increasing performance, even though showing high failure rates.
Action Mapping for Reinforcement Learning in Continuous Environments with Constraints0 20000 40000 60000 80000 100000
Interaction steps in thousands
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Cumulative reward
(a) Robot arm – Return0 20000 40000 60000 80000 100000
Interaction steps in thousands
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Cumulative reward AM-PPO
AM-PPO + Replacement
PPO
Lagrangian PPO
PPO + Replacement
PPO + Resampling
PPO + Projection0 20000 40000 60000 80000 100000
Interaction steps in thousands
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Constraint violation (b) Robot arm – Constraint violation0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000
Interaction steps in thousands
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Cumulative reward
(c) Path planning – Return0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000
Interaction steps in thousands
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Task solved
AM-SAC
SAC
Lagrangian SAC
SAC + Resampling
SAC + Projection0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000
Interaction steps in thousands
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Constraint violation (d) Path planning – Constraint violation
Figure 4: Training curves for the two applications with the results for the robot arm environment
in (a)+(b) and for the path planning environment in (c)+(d). For each configuration, 5 agents were
trained, with the curves showing the median and the region between the highest and lowest perfor-
mance. Both “Replacement” agents show no constraint violation in (b).
The Lagrangian PPO shows better constraint satisfaction with similar objective performance. In
contrast, action replacement and resampling appear to hamper performance. PPO with action re-
placement struggles to learn anything in the beginning, presumably because most proposed actions
are replaced with the null action. Therefore, its failure rate is constant at zero. PPO with action re-
sampling first learns faster than PPO but then exhibits instability, likely due to the wrong estimation
of the policy ratio in the PPO objective.
PPO with action projection and action mapping (AM-PPO, AM-PPO + Replacement) learn signif-
icantly faster with higher final performance than the model-free baselines. Action mapping yields
slightly higher performance at the end of training, and it exhibits fewer constraint violations than
action projection. Adding action replacement to action mapping yields the best performance with-
out constraint violations. This application showed that action mapping and projection are both very
beneficial with perfect feasibility models that are mostly convex, with action mapping having a
slight edge. Since in this example a safe action exists, action replacement can always be added to
guarantee constraint satisfaction and together with action mapping, it also improves performance.
Additionally, an evaluation of training and inference times in Appendix F shows that projection is
significantly more expensive than action mapping.
6.2 Path Planning
Before inspecting the training performance of the different approaches, Fig. 5 shows the inner work-
ings of action mapping. Fig. 5a shows the output distribution of the pretrained feasibility policy πθ
f
when sampling uniformly from the latent space Z. The feasibility policy is able to generate actions
in both disconnected sets of feasible actions, with only minimal actions between. Figs. 5b and 5c
show how the objective policy can take advantage of this. At the beginning of training, the agent
outputs a distribution with high entropy in the latent space, leading to a bi-modal distribution in the
action space (Fig. 5b). After training, the agent’s output entropy is lower, and the resulting distri-
bution in the action space usually collapses to a single mode (Fig. 5c). This visualization shows
a crucial aspect of action mapping. It allows an objective policy to express multi-modal action
distributions by only parameterizing a single Gaussian distribution in the latent space, which can
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
(a) a ∼ πθ
f (s, z)|z∼U(Z) (b) a ∼ πθ
f (s, z)|z∼πϕb
o (·|s) (c) a ∼ πθ
f (s, z)|z∼πϕe
o (·|s)
Figure 5: Visualization of 256 generated actions of πθ
f for a given state (a) if z is sampled uniformly,
(b) if sampled from the distribution of πϕb
o , being an objective policy in the beginning of training,
and (c) if sampled from the distribution of πϕe
o which is the agent at the end of training.
significantly improve exploration. Appendix H shows further examples of the multimodal action
distribution of the feasibility policy.
Inspecting the training performance of the different approaches in the path planning environment in
Figs. 4c and 4d, it can be seen that SAC and SAC with resampling do not learn much. Their initial
jump in performance occurs when the agent starts understanding the targets, but it usually fails to
reach them because it does not learn to understand the obstacles. Therefore, both agents always
end their episodes through a constraint violation. The Lagrangian SAC agent focuses only on not
violating constraints, which leads to slightly better constraint satisfaction but completely inhibits
the learning of the objective. In contrast, when the action projection agent learns to understand the
targets, its performance jumps significantly higher. The reason is that when it tries to go straight to
each target, action projection pushes it around the obstacles.
The action mapping agent (AM-SAC) exhibits a higher initial performance jump, indicating that
action mapping more successfully nudges the agent around obstacles. Additionally, in contrast to
all other approaches, the action mapping agent has a second jump in performance and constraint
satisfaction between 5M and 10M steps (except for one out of five runs of action projection signifi-
cantly later). This leap can be attributed to the objective policy’s understanding of the obstacles and
incorporating them into the plan instead of only being nudged around by the feasibility policy. This
application shows that action mapping outperforms action projection with approximate feasibility
models. Fig. A.2 in the appendix shows trajectory examples of the AM-SAC agent, highlighting
the difficulty of that environment through the high variability of initial conditions. An evaluation
of the dependence on the approximation accuracy of the feasibility model is shown in Appendix G.
Additionally, as in the robotic arm example, training and inference times of action mapping are
significantly faster than action projection, as shown in Appendix F.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
We proposed and implemented a novel DRL training strategy based on action mapping. Our results
demonstrate that this approach performs exceptionally well, particularly when using approximate
feasibility models. We highlighted how even approximate model knowledge can be effectively in-
corporated into the DRL process to enhance training performance, emphasizing the potential to inte-
grate domain-specific insights into DRL frameworks. We further show how action mapping allows
the agent to express multi-modal action distributions, which can significantly improve exploration.
The use of KDE introduces some distance between the generated actions and the boundary of fea-
sible actions, which may result in conservative action selection. Furthermore, the feasibility policy
πf does not completely eliminate the generation of infeasible actions and, therefore, does not pro-
vide strict safety guarantees. Consequently, the learned πθ
f is not surjective and does not remove all
constraints from the SCMDP, but still significantly relaxes the constraints.
While deriving a feasibility model is often a difficult and application-specific task, we show that
deriving one and utilizing action mapping can substantially improve learning performance. There-
Action Mapping for Reinforcement Learning in Continuous Environments with Constraints
fore, we advocate for exploring the utilization of feasibility models in practical applications where
model-free RL’s performance is insufficient.
Future work will explore whether weight-sharing or initialization of parameters from πf to the actor
and critic of the policy πo could lead to more efficient learning. Furthermore, spline-based path
planning, which has shown promising results, warrants further investigation, particularly in robotic
path planning scenarios. Lastly, expanding action mapping to utilize learned feasibility models
could be explored to offer an alternative to common approaches like Lagrangian multipliers or action
projection.
Acknowledgments
Marco Caccamo was supported by an Alexander von Humboldt Professorship endowed by the Ger-
man Federal Ministry of Education and Research.
References
Joshua Achiam, David Held, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Constrained policy optimization. In
International conference on machine learning, pp. 22–31. PMLR, 2017.
Mohammed Alshiekh, Roderick Bloem, Rüdiger Ehlers, Bettina Könighofer, Scott Niekum, and
Ufuk Topcu. Safe reinforcement learning via shielding. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference
on artificial intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Eitan Altman. Constrained Markov decision processes. Routledge, 2021.
Harald Bayerlein, Mirco Theile, Marco Caccamo, and David Gesbert. Multi-uav path planning for
wireless data harvesting with deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Open Journal of the Communi-
cations Society, 2:1171–1187, 2021.
Homanga Bharadhwaj, Aviral Kumar, Nicholas Rhinehart, Sergey Levine, Florian Shkurti, and Ani-
mesh Garg. Conservative safety critics for exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14497, 2020.
Yash Chandak, Georgios Theocharous, James Kostas, Scott Jordan, and Philip Thomas. Learning
action representations for reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learn-
ing, pp. 941–950. PMLR, 2019.
Richard Cheng, Gábor Orosz, Richard M Murray, and Joel W Burdick. End-to-end safe reinforce-
ment learning through barrier functions for safety-critical continuous control tasks. In Proceed-
ings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 33, pp. 3387–3395, 2019.
Yinlam Chow, Ofir Nachum, Aleksandra Faust, Edgar Duenez-Guzman, and Mohammad
Ghavamzadeh. Lyapunov-based safe policy optimization for continuous control. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.10031, 2019.
Gal Dalal, Krishnamurthy Dvijotham, Matej Vecerik, Todd Hester, Cosmin Paduraru, and Yuval
Tassa. Safe exploration in continuous action spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.08757, 2018.
Priya L. Donti, David Rolnick, and J Zico Kolter. DC3: A learning method for optimization with
hard constraints. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Franka-Robotics. Franka documentation. https://frankaemika.github.io/docs/control_parameters.html,
2024. Accessed: 2024-09-30.
Niklas Funk, Georgia Chalvatzaki, Boris Belousov, and Jan Peters. Learn2assemble with struc-
tured representations and search for robotic architectural construction. In Conference on Robot
Learning, pp. 1401–1411. PMLR, 2022.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
Pengjie Gu, Mengchen Zhao, Chen Chen, Dong Li, Jianye Hao, and Bo An. Learning pseudometric-
based action representations for offline reinforcement learning. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie
Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th
International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, pp. 7902–7918. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022a. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
press/v162/gu22b.html.
Shangding Gu, Long Yang, Yali Du, Guang Chen, Florian Walter, Jun Wang, and Alois Knoll.
A review of safe reinforcement learning: Methods, theory and applications. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.10330, 2022b.
Sehoon Ha, Peng Xu, Zhenyu Tan, Sergey Levine, and Jie Tan. Learning to walk in the real world
with minimal human effort. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08550, 2020.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Shengyi Huang and Santiago Ontañón. A closer look at invalid action masking in policy gradient
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.14171, 2020.
Hanna Krasowski, Xiao Wang, and Matthias Althoff. Safe reinforcement learning for autonomous
lane changing using set-based prediction. In 2020 IEEE 23rd International Conference on Intel-
ligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), pp. 1–7. IEEE, 2020.
Boyan Li, Hongyao Tang, YAN ZHENG, Jianye HAO, Pengyi Li, Zhen Wang, Zhaopeng Meng,
and LI Wang. HyAR: Addressing discrete-continuous action reinforcement learning via hybrid
action representation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=64trBbOhdGU.
Haitong Ma, Yang Guan, Shegnbo Eben Li, Xiangteng Zhang, Sifa Zheng, and Jianyu Chen. Feasi-
ble actor-critic: Constrained reinforcement learning for ensuring statewise safety. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.10682, 2021.
Mohammadreza Nazari, Afshin Oroojlooy, Lawrence Snyder, and Martin Takác. Reinforcement
learning for solving the vehicle routing problem. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 31, 2018.
OmniSafe Team. Omnisafe – lagrange algorithms. https://www.omnisafe.ai/en/
latest/saferlapi/lagrange.html, 2022. Accessed: 2024-11-25.
Alex Ray, Joshua Achiam, and Dario Amodei. Benchmarking safe exploration in deep reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01708, 7(1):2, 2019.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-
dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.02438, 2015.
Krishnan Srinivasan, Benjamin Eysenbach, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, and Chelsea Finn. Learning to be
safe: Deep rl with a safety critic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14603, 2020.
Roland Stolz, Hanna Krasowski, Jakob Thumm, Michael Eichelbeck, Philipp Gassert, and Matthias
Althoff. Excluding the irrelevant: Focusing reinforcement learning through continuous action
masking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.03704, 2024.
Binqi Sun, Mirco Theile, Ziyuan Qin, Daniele Bernardini, Debayan Roy, Andrea Bastoni, and Marco
Caccamo. Edge generation scheduling for dag tasks using deep reinforcement learning. IEEE
Transactions on Computers, 2024.
Action Mapping for Reinforcement Learning in Continuous Environments with Constraints
Richard S Sutton. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. A Bradford Book, 2018.
Mirco Theile, Daniele Bernardini, Raphael Trumpp, Cristina Piazza, Marco Caccamo, and Alberto L
Sangiovanni-Vincentelli. Learning to generate all feasible actions. IEEE Access, 2024.
Raphael Trumpp, Ehsan Javanmardi, Jin Nakazato, Manabu Tsukada, and Marco Caccamo. Race-
mop: Mapless online path planning for multi-agent autonomous racing using residual policy
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07129, 2024.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
William Whitney, Rajat Agarwal, Kyunghyun Cho, and Abhinav Gupta. Dynamics-aware em-
beddings. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=BJgZGeHFPH.
Linrui Zhang, Li Shen, Long Yang, Shixiang Chen, Bo Yuan, Xueqian Wang, and Dacheng
Tao. Penalized proximal policy optimization for safe reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.11814, 2022.
Linrui Zhang, Qin Zhang, Li Shen, Bo Yuan, Xueqian Wang, and Dacheng Tao. Evaluating model-
free reinforcement learning toward safety-critical tasks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 15313–15321, 2023.
Weiye Zhao, Tairan He, Rui Chen, Tianhao Wei, and Changliu Liu. State-wise safe reinforcement
learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03122, 2023.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
Supplementary Materials
The following content was not necessarily subject to peer review.
Appendix
A Feasibility Policy Training
Algorithm 2 Feasibility Policy Pretraining, adapted from Theile et al. (2024)
1: Initialize πθ
f
2: for 1 to Feasibility Training Steps do
3: for k = 1 to K do
4: sf ← Generate partial state in Sf ▷ Only containing feasibility relevant information
5: zi ∼ U(Z), ∀i ∈ [1, N ] ▷ Sample uniformly in latent space
6: ai ← πθ
f (sk, zi), ∀i ∈ [1, N ] ▷ Map latents to actions for given state
7: a∗
j ← aj + ϵj , ϵj ∼ N (0, σ′), ∀j ∈ [1, N ] ▷ Add noise to actions to get samples
8: ˆqj ← 1
N
PN
i=1 kσ (a∗
j − ai), ∀j ∈ [1, N ] ▷ Evaluate KDE on samples
9: ˆq′
j ← 1
N
PN
i=1 kσ′ (a∗
j − ai), ∀j ∈ [1, N ] ▷ Evaluate proposal KDE on samples
10: rj ← g(sk, a∗
j ), ∀j ∈ [1, N ] ▷ Evaluate feasibility model on samples
11: ˆZk ← 1
N
PN
j=1
rj
ˆq′
j
▷ Estimate partition function
12: ˆpj ← rj
ˆZk
, ∀j ∈ [1, N ] ▷ Estimate target distribution at the samples
13: gk ← 1
2N
PN
j=1
ˆqj
ˆq′
j
log
 2ˆqj
ˆqj + ˆpj

∇θ log(ˆqj ) ▷ Compute the gradient of the JS loss
14: θ ← θ − αθ 1
K
PK
k=1 gk ▷ Apply gradient
To determine how long the feasibility policy needs to be trained, the policy should be evaluated at
regular intervals. This is necessary since the feasibility model is only evaluated on noisy samples
(line 10), and thus, the result cannot be used to determine convergence. If the agent’s precision
(i.e., the number of feasible actions among all generated actions) and the average distance between
feasible actions (an indicator of recall, i.e., higher distance means covering more feasible actions)
stabilizes, the agent has trained sufficiently. Note that the precision usually cannot and does not need
to reach 100%, as the agent will always generate infeasible actions if the sets of feasible actions are
disconnected. Additionally, the partial state generator may sometimes generate states for which no
feasible action exists, as discussed in the following.
A.1 Partial State Generator
For the feasibility policy training, a partial state generator and a parallelizable feasibility model
g : Sf × A → B are needed. In most environments, not all state variables are relevant for feasibility
and can thus be omitted in the feasibility policy training (e.g., the end-effector pose target in the
robot arm environment and the target regions in the path planning environment). Removing these
variables from the state space yields the partial state space Sf .
The state generator does not need to generate states with a distribution similar to a realistic state
visitation from any policy. It is even preferential to generate more safety-critical partial states.
Therefore, more obstacles can be generated, and the agent’s position can be sampled closer to these
obstacles than when generating initial states for episodes.
In the robotic arm environment, the state generator generates randomly placed spherical obstacles
and a random joint configuration within the joint limits. The partial state is ready after removing
obstacles that collide with the arm.
Action Mapping for Reinforcement Learning in Continuous Environments with Constraints
In the path planning environment, the state generator similarly generates randomly placed rectangu-
lar obstacles and a random position and velocity of the agent. After removing obstacles colliding
with the position, the partial state is ready. Our experiments show that ensuring a feasible action
exists for every generated state is unnecessary.
B Neural Network Architecture and Hyperparameters+
MHA
K V Q
+
Shared
MLP
Cross-Attention
Objective
+
MHA
Q K V
Shared
MLP
+
Cross-Attention
Constraints
Action*
Latent
Multi Objective
Internal State
Objective
Dense Dense Dense
+
Shared
MLP
Shared
MLP
+
+
Dense
Dense Dense Dense
Policy Parameters
(Q-)Value
Action
C x
L x
Actor Critic Feasibility
Policy
* Only for Q-Value Critic
Fixed-Size
Inputs
Processing
Multi Constraints
P x
P x
Figure A.1: Generalized neural network architecture for the networks used in both experiments. The
different network types (πθ
o , Qψ , Vψ , πϕ
f ) have different inputs and outputs indicated through the
coloring. As such, the feasibility policy does not process objective-related information, omitting
the second cross-attention. While all networks share the same structure, they do not share param-
eters. The Shared MLPs before the cross-attention are repeated P times, the cross-attention layers
are repeated C times, and the dense layer after them is repeated L times. The ∪ is a concatenation.
Layer-Normalization is added for all inputs to the Multi-Head Attention (MHA). The hyperparam-
eters are listed in Table A.1.
Both environments contain lists of elements, such as the obstacles in the robotic arm environment
and the obstacles and targets in the path planning one. The agent needs to process these lists in-
variantly to permutations. Therefore, we utilize attention, with its query given by the internal state
representation of the agent, and key and value being the obstacles and targets alternatingly. All net-
works, the actor, critic, and feasibility policy share the same architecture, with the exception that the
feasibility policy does not process the objective-relevant inputs.
C Comparison Baselines
C.1 Feasibility Model-based
Action Replacement. The feasibility model g is queried on a proposed action of the agent. If
deemed feasible, the action is applied to the system. Otherwise, the action is rejected and replaced
with a predefined feasible one. The feasible action is usually task-independent and does not con-
tribute meaningfully to task completion. Additionally, it is often not trivial to derive a feasible
action, such as in the path planning environment. Therefore, we only compare to action replacement
in the robotic arm example, where the feasible action is to apply no motion to the arm.
Action Resampling. Similar to action replacement, infeasible actions are rejected. Instead of re-
placing them with a known feasible action, the stochastic agent is queried again to provide different
actions. This resampling step is repeated until either a feasible action is found or a maximum num-
ber of sampling steps is reached. The advantage is that it does not require a known feasible action.
However, if the agent’s action distribution is too far from the feasible actions, resampling may fail
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
Table A.1: Hyperparameters for the AM-SAC and AM-PPO configurations.
Parameter AM-SAC AM-PPO
Total interaction steps 25, 000, 000 100, 000, 000
Memory/Rollout size 1, 000, 000 10, 000
Batch size 128 128
Discount factor (γ) 0.97 0.97
Actor learning rate (initial) 3 × 10−5 3 × 10−5
Actor learning rate decay rate - 0.0
Actor learning rate decay steps - 100, 000, 000
Critic learning rate (initial) 1 × 10−4 1 × 10−4
Critic learning rate decay rate - 0.0
Critic learning rate decay steps - 100, 000, 000
Entropy coefficient 0.0002 0.005
Soft update factor (τ ) 0.005 -
Policy update delay 2048 -
Training steps per environment step 2/50 -
Number of parallel environments 50 50
Number of rollout epochs - 3
Advantage normalization - true
GAE lambda (λ) - 0.9
Clipping parameter (ϵ) - 0.2
Feasibility divergence samples (N ) 1024 1024
Feasibility divergence sigma (σ) 0.1 0.1
Feasibility divergence sigma prime factor 2.0 1.0
Feasibility Training Steps 500, 000 1, 000, 000
Feasibility states per batch (K) 16 16
Feasibility learning rate 1 × 10−4 1 × 10−4
Layer Size 256 256
Num Dense Layers Pre Attention (P ) 1 3
Num Cross-Attention Layers (C) 3 3
Num Heads in MHA 16 4
Key Dim in MHA 16 64
Num Dense Layers Post Attention (L) 3 3
to generate a feasible action within the allowed iterations, leading to high failure rates or inefficient
learning. It further alters the actual likelihood of actions, which we show can destabilize the DRL
training.
Action Projection. In this approach, an optimization method finds the closest feasible action to the
one proposed by the agent based on some distance metric. While action projection often yields better
task performance by staying close to the agent’s intended action, it can introduce computational
overhead since the optimization process must be repeated at every step. For example, Donti et al.
(2021) propose iteratively minimizing G from (5) via gradient steps ∆aG(s, a). However, if G is
not convex–which is often the case in practical scenarios–action projection may not yield a feasible
solution, as the optimization process can get trapped in local minima. Furthermore, the actions
are projected onto the boundary between feasible and infeasible actions. If the feasibility model
is only approximate, the actions on the boundary may not be feasible, requiring more conservative
approximate solutions. Specifically, in the path planning environment, a higher distance to obstacles
and a tighter curvature bound had to be enforced.
C.2 Model-free Lagrangian Algorithms
To use Lagrangian algorithms, a safety critic QC (s, a) is trained that estimates the expected cumu-
lative cost or probability of failure according to
QC (s, a) = c(s, a) + γC Es′∼P(·|s,a)

min
a′∈A QC (s′, a′)

. (15)
For on-policy algorithms, the corresponding state cost-value is defined as
Vπ
C (s) = Ea∼π(·|s) [QC (s, a)] . (16)
Action Mapping for Reinforcement Learning in Continuous Environments with Constraints
For the Lagrangian SAC (Ha et al., 2020), the objective of the policy is the Lagrangian dual
min
λ≥0 max
π Es∼D,a∼π(·|s) [Q(s, a) + α log π(a|s) − λ(QC (s, a) − δC )] , (17)
with δC being a safety threshold that can be tuned.
For the Lagrangian PPO (Ray et al., 2019), (based on the implementation by OmniSafe(OmniSafe
Team, 2022)), the policy objective is the dual
min
λ≥0 max
π E(s,a)∼π
 π(a|s)
πold(a|s) (Aπ (s, a) − λAπ
C (s, a))

, (18)
in which the advantages A and AC are estimated using the generalized advantage estimation Schul-
man et al. (2015). As in the standard PPO, the change in the ratio can be clipped with parameter ϵ.
The hyperparameters used are listed in Tab. A.2.
Table A.2: Hyperparameters for the Lagrangian SAC and Lagrangian PPO configurations that are
different from Tab. A.1.
Parameter AM-SAC AM-PPO
Discount factor cost γC 0.9 0 (Not needed)
Safety delta δC 0.05 -
Safety critic learning rate 1 × 10−4 1 × 10−4
Lagrangian mult. learning rate 0.01 0.01
D Robotic Arm Environment
Table A.3: Parameters of the robotic arm environment.
Description Value
number of steps until timout flag is set 100
time duration of one timestep 0.5s
maximum number of obstacles after rejection sampling 20
number of obstacles before rejection sampling 30
maximum allowed cartesian speed of any joint 0.3 m/s
maximum angle change in one timestep 90°
Table A.4: DH parameters of the robotic arm (Franka-Robotics, 2024).
Joint a [m] d [m] α [rad] θ [rad]
Joint 1 0 0.333 0 θ1
Joint 2 0 0 − π
2 θ2
Joint 3 0 0.316 π
2 θ3
Joint 4 0.0825 0 π
2 θ4
Joint 5 -0.0825 0.384 − π
2 θ5
Joint 6 0 0 π
2 θ6
Joint 7 0.088 0 π
2 θ7
Flange 0 0.107 0 0
Table A.5: Robotic arm joint limits (Franka-Robotics, 2024).
Joint Lower Limit [rad] Upper Limit [rad]
Joint 1 -2.7437 2.7437
Joint 2 -1.7837 1.7837
Joint 3 -2.9007 2.9007
Joint 4 -3.0421 -0.1518
Joint 5 -2.8065 2.8065
Joint 6 0.5445 4.5169
Joint 7 -3.0159 3.0159
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
E Path planning solved scenarios
(a) (b) (c)
Figure A.2: Example trajectories of the AM-SAC agent solving random scenarios of the spline-
based path planning environment with non-holonomic constraints.
F Computation Comparison
Table A.6: Timing measurements average for the different agent configurations in both environments
using the machine with specifications in Tab. A.7. Inference time mixed refers to deploying neural
network inference on the GPU while keeping projection on the CPU.
Robotic Arm Path Planning
PPO PPO + Proj. AM-PPO SAC SAC + Proj. AM-SAC
Training time [h] 11.6 23.5 16.8 (5.5 + 11.3) 13.0 22.0 16.3 (3.3 + 13.0)
Inference time CPU [ms] 3.25 8.23 5.18 5.63 11.96 7.66
Inference time GPU [ms] 0.87 7.17 1.45 1.33 10.91 2.28
Inference time Mixed [ms] - 6.70 - - 8.06 -
Tab. A.6 presents a comparison of training and inference times across different agent configurations
in the robotic arm and path planning environments. The results are measured on the system described
in Tab. A.7.
In terms of training time, both environments exhibit similar trends. After pretraining the feasibility
policy, the training time for the policy πo in the action mapping (AM) approaches with SAC and
PPO is comparable to their respective baselines. However, the projection-based methods take sig-
nificantly longer to train, as the projection step is computationally expensive and must be executed
sequentially, which adds substantial overhead.
Inference time results further highlight the efficiency of the proposed AM method. Since AM only
introduces an additional neural network inference, and the network is relatively smaller (as it does
not process the objective-relevant inputs such as target pose or list of targets), the increase in in-
ference time is modest, approximately 50%. On the other hand, projection-based methods incur a
much larger time overhead due to the sequential nature of the projection process, which limits the
ability to fully utilize GPU acceleration. When comparing mixed projection (GPU for network in-
ference, CPU for projection) with GPU-based AM, the projection approach is approximately three
times slower.
These results demonstrate the computational advantages of AM, particularly in scenarios where
inference efficiency is crucial.
Action Mapping for Reinforcement Learning in Continuous Environments with Constraints
Table A.7: Computer Specifications
Specification Details
CPU AMD Ryzen Threadripper PRO 7985WX (64 Cores, 5.1 GHz Boost)
RAM 512 GB DDR5 (4800 MT/s)
GPU NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 (24 GB VRAM)
Operating System Ubuntu 22.04.4 LTS
G Feasibility Model Approximation0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000
Interaction steps in thousands
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Cumulative reward
(a) Path planning – Return0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000
Interaction steps in thousands
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Task solved
AM-SAC (128)
AM-SAC (64)
AM-SAC (32)
AM-SAC (16)
AM-SAC (8)
AM-SAC (4)
SAC0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000
Interaction steps in thousands
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Constraint violation (b) Path planning – Constraint violation
Figure A.3: Training curves of different AM-SAC in the path planning environment with different
numbers of feasibility evaluation points. For each configuration, 3 agents were trained.
The action space in the path planning environment utilizes splines to parameterize possible multi-
step trajectories for which a cost as in (4) can be approximated. The cost is approximated in two
ways. First, the spline length is bounded since it would require too many parameters to describe the
entire trajectory. Therefore, the feasibility model can only determine if a feasible trajectory exists
for the next few steps.
The second approximation in the feasibility model is a numerical approximation of the violation of
constraints along the spline. To facilitate the fast evaluation of the feasibility model, S equidistant
points in parameter space are evaluated for constraint violation (outside environment, inside obsta-
cle, local curvature exceeding maximum). Additionally, the length of the spline is approximated as
the sum of Euclidean distances between these points. Therefore, the number of points S plays a
significant role in the accuracy of the feasibility model.
To assess the impact of the accuracy of the feasibility model on the learning progress of ac-
tion mapping, we trained action mapping agents (πf and πo) using different numbers of S ∈
{4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128}, in which S = 64 corresponds to the results in Section 6.2. The results in
Fig. A.3 show that higher values of S lead to better and more stable performance. With S = 4,
AM-SAC performs only slightly better than SAC, but with more points, the performance jumps sig-
nificantly. From S = 32 and above, the performance does not change significantly anymore. The
computational cost of training πf is not very sensitive to S since the points can be evaluated in
parallel. The training time of πf for S = 4 is approximately 20% faster than for S = 128.
H Action Distribution Examples
Figure A.4 shows six example states with actions, i.e., splines, generated by the feasibility policy πf
when sampling uniformly at random from the latent space Z. It shows how the feasibility policy can
generate various multimodal distributions depending on the state. An objective policy, which forms
a squashed Gaussian distribution in the latent space, will thus also be able to express multimodal
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
Figure A.4: Examples of the distribution of πf when sampling 512 values uniformly in the latent
space.
distributions if its bandwidth is large enough. In the beginning of training, the bandwidth of the
objective policy tends to be very large.