Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025 Cover Page
Online Intrinsic Rewards for Decision Making Agents
from Large Language Model Feedback
Qinqing Zheng, Mikael Henaff, Amy Zhang, Aditya Grover,
Brandon Amos
Keywords: intrinsic motivation, exploration, sparse rewards, LLMs
Summary
Automatically synthesizing dense rewards from natural language descriptions is a promis-
ing paradigm in reinforcement learning (RL), with applications to sparse reward problems,
open-ended exploration, and hierarchical skill design. Recent works have made promising
steps by exploiting the prior knowledge of large language models (LLMs). However, these
approaches suffer from important limitations: they are either not scalable to problems requir-
ing billions of environment samples, due to requiring LLM annotations for each observation,
or they require a diverse offline dataset, which may not exist or be impossible to collect. In
this work, we address these limitations through a combination of algorithmic and systems-
level contributions. We propose ONI, a distributed architecture that simultaneously learns an
RL policy and an intrinsic reward function using LLM feedback. Our approach annotates
the agent’s collected experience via an asynchronous LLM server, which is then distilled into
an intrinsic reward model. We explore a range of algorithmic choices for reward modeling
with varying complexity, including hashing, classification, and ranking models. Our approach
achieves state-of-the-art performance across a range of challenging, sparse reward tasks from
the NetHack Learning Environment in a simple unified process, solely using the agent’s gath-
ered experience, without requiring external datasets.
Contribution(s)
1. This paper presents a method, system design and open-source codebase for learning intrinsic
rewards from LLM feedback in an online manner, which scales to high-throughput settings.
Context: Several methods for producing intrinsic rewards from LLM feedback have been
proposed in prior work. However, they either do not scale to high-throughput settings,
or they require a large and diverse offline dataset. Our method works in high-throughput
settings without requiring offline data.
Online Intrinsic Rewards for Decision Making Agents from Large Language Model Feedback
Online Intrinsic Rewards for Decision Making Agents
from Large Language Model Feedback
Qinqing Zheng1†, Mikael Henaff1†, Amy Zhang1, 2, Aditya Grover3,
Brandon Amos1
1Meta 2UT Austin 3UCLA
† Equal contribution
Abstract
Automatically synthesizing dense rewards from natural language descriptions is a
promising paradigm in reinforcement learning (RL), with applications to sparse reward
problems, open-ended exploration, and hierarchical skill design. Recent works have
made promising steps by exploiting the prior knowledge of large language models
(LLMs). However, these approaches suffer from important limitations: they are
either not scalable to problems requiring billions of environment samples, due to
requiring LLM annotations for each observation, or they require a diverse offline
dataset, which may not exist or be impossible to collect. In this work, we address
these limitations through a combination of algorithmic and systems-level contributions.
We propose ONI, a distributed architecture that simultaneously learns an RL policy
and an intrinsic reward function using LLM feedback. Our approach annotates
the agent’s collected experience via an asynchronous LLM server, which is then
distilled into an intrinsic reward model. We explore a range of algorithmic choices
for reward modeling with varying complexity, including hashing, classification, and
ranking models. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance across a range
of challenging tasks from the NetHack Learning Environment, while removing the
need for large offline datasets required by prior work. We make our code available at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/oni.
1 Introduction
Reward functions are central to reinforcement learning (RL), and are often assumed to be given
as part of the problem definition (Sutton & Barto, 2018). These functions are written to describe
the task at hand, and often involve tradeoffs between ease of task definition and ease of policy
optimization. For example, assigning a reward of +1 for solving the task and 0 otherwise is simple
to define and accurately reflects the task goal, but is difficult to optimize due to providing zero
gradients almost everywhere.
These difficulties have motivated the use of intrinsic rewards to aid policy optimization (Randlov
& Alstrøm, 1998; Ng et al., 1999; Sorg et al., 2010; Singh et al., 2010). The reward designer can
include additional reward shaping terms to create a denser learning signal, which can reflect task
progress or guide the agent towards intermediate goals. However, designing intrinsic rewards can
be remarkably challenging (Booth et al., 2023; Ibrahim et al., 2024) and places increased demands
on human experts to provide task-specific knowledge.
Recently, several works have been proposed to leverage the vast prior knowledge encoded in large
language models (LLMs) to automate the reward design process, based on a task description in
natural language. They can be broadly categorized into two families:
1. Generating the reward function’s code by LLM. A number of methods have been proposed
to automatically generate executable code that computes the reward directly (Ma et al., 2023; Xie
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024). While they have demonstrated success in complex
continuous control tasks, they either require access to environment source code to include in the
prompt, or a detailed description of input parameters and reward function templates. Furthermore,
they are limited to reward functions compactly expressible via code, describing explicit logic, and
it is unclear how these approaches can easily process high-dimensional state representations such as
images, or semantic features such as natural language.
2. Generating reward values by LLMs. Motif (Klissarov et al., 2023; 2025) is a typical example
of this category. It ranks the captions of pairs of observations using an LLM and distills these
preferences into a parametric reward model. Motif does not require access to environment source
code nor numerical state representation, can process semantic input features, and can scale to prob-
lems requiring billions of environment samples. Nevertheless, it also suffers from two important
limitations. First, it requires a diverse, pre-existing dataset of captioned observations which are used
to elicit preferences from the LLM. In many situations, such a dataset might not exist, and collecting
it can increase the sample complexity. More importantly, collecting a diverse dataset often requires
a non-trivial reward function that is feasible to optimize, which is the primary problem we aim to
solve with intrinsic reward functions in the first place. Second, it involves a complex three-stage
process, which sequentially annotates observations using an LLM, trains a reward model, and
finally trains an RL agent. This is still time-consuming, given that the LLM annotation process can
take several days’ worth of GPU hours, and is done prior to training the reward model and RL agent.
Alternatively, Chu et al. (2023) query the LLM to directly label observations as having high or
low reward at each timestep. However, querying an LLM for every observation is computationally
infeasible for many RL applications, which involve millions or billions of observations.
As a consequence, it would be desirable to have an integrated solution that offers:
(1) concurrent and fast online learning of both the intrinsic rewards and the policy that requires no
external data nor auxiliary reward functions,
(2) expressible reward functions that can capture semantic features that are difficult to process with
compact executable code.
In this work, we present ONI, a distributed online intrinsic reward and agent learning system —
Figure 1 overviews the high-level components. ONI removes the dependency on external datasets
beyond the agent’s own experience and enables large-scale RL training with ease. ONI assumes
access to captions of observations, similar to previous work (Klissarov et al., 2023; Chu et al.,
2023). The captions of collected observations are annotated online by an asynchronous LLM
server, and both the policy and intrinsic reward model are simultaneously updated using the LLM’s
feedback. Such a learning framework allows us to easily instantiate different algorithmic choices for
synthesizing LLM feedback. Specifically, we explore three methods: the first one is retrieval-based
and simply hashes the annotations; the second builds a binary classification model to distill the
sentiment labels returned by the LLM; and the third sends pairs of captions to the LLM server for
preference labeling and learns a ranking model, similar to Motif. We demonstrate that ONI is able
to match Motif’s performance across a range of challenging, sparse rewards from the NetHack
Learning Environment (NLE) (Küttler et al., 2020), solely using the agent’s gathered experience
in a single, unified process. We also open-source our code to facilitate future work on LLM-based
intrinsic motivation in settings where large offline datasets are not available.
2 Background
We consider a partially observed Markov decision process (POMDP) setting where the problem is
defined by M = (S, A, O, p0, P, O, r, γ). At each episode, an initial state s0 ∈ S is sampled from
the initial state distribution p0. At each time step t, the agent observes ot ∈ O which is computed
by the emission function O(st), and takes an action at ∈ A. This action causes the environment to
transition to a new state, st+1 ∼ p(st, at). A new observation ot+1 and reward rt+1 = r(ot+1) are
given to the agent, and the process continues. The goal of the agent is to learn a policy π : O →
Online Intrinsic Rewards for Decision Making Agents from Large Language Model FeedbackOFFLINE DATASET ANNOTATION REWARD TRAINING RL TRAINING
reward
model
agent
𝑟int(𝑜𝑡)
use data from a SOTA agent trained for 1B steps
ONLINE DATASET ANNOTATION
REWARD TRAINING
OR RETRIEVAL RL TRAINING
reward
model
agent
𝑟int(𝑜𝑡)
environment
actions observations
only use data collected online
rankings (𝑜1 ≻ 𝑜2, 𝑜4 ≻ 𝑜3, …)
labels (𝑜1 helpful, 𝑜2 unhelpful, …)
Motif
ONI
observations
(𝑜1, 𝑜2, …)
language
model
annotations
rankings (𝑜1 ≻ 𝑜2, 𝑜4 ≻ 𝑜3, …)
observations
(𝑜1, 𝑜2, …)
language
model
annotations
environment
actions observations
Figure 1: Overview of Motif (Klissarov et al., 2023) and ONI.
∆(A) which maximizes the expected return Eπ [P
t γtrt]. In this work, we additionally assume
each observation ot includes a textual caption ct, which could be empty. For observation spaces
without textual captions, ct could in principle be provided by a captioning model as well.
In many situations, the extrinsic environment reward r is sparse, and the resulting return objective
is challenging to optimize. We therefore consider methods which make use of an auxiliary intrinsic
reward rint and define a composite surrogate reward:
¯r(ot) = r(ot) + β · rint(ot). (1)
A key research question is how to define or learn the intrinsic reward rint. A first option is to
manually define rint based on task-specific goals, for example a measure of the distance between
the agent’s current state and the goal state. However, handcrafting the intrinsic reward function
can require significant domain knowledge and must be redone for each new task. A second option
is to define rint to measure some notion of observation novelty, which encourages the agent to
systematically explore the environment. This can work well in smaller environments, but fails in
ones that cannot be exhaustively explored in a tractable amount of time. A third class of methods,
which we focus on in this work, leverage LLMs to automatically synthesize rint to reflect prior
knowledge about the task. We discuss all three classes of methods in more detail in Section 4.
3 Online Intrinsic Rewards
3.1 System design: distributed PPO with LLM annotations
This section outlines our system for learning online intrinsic rewards alongside the policy optimiza-
tion. The engineering and design are an important piece of our research, as they enable scaling to
the high-throughput settings we are interested in. The rest of our experimental studies are conducted
within this system and influenced by the throughput of its interacting components.
Our core system, illustrated in Figure 2, is built on top of the Sample Factory library v1.0 (Petrenko
et al., 2020) and their asynchronous variant of proximal policy optimization (Schulman et al., 2017),
referred to as APPO. APPO operates on a single machine and concurrently runs many environment
instances while asynchronously updating policy and value estimates with the usual PPO rules, and
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025OuAdditional Modules
Sample Factory
policytrajectories
observations
actions
captions annotations
LLM Server
HTTP/REST
Policy WorkersRollout Workers
Learner Worker
(policy and intrinsic reward updates)
LLM Annotation Worker
Figure 2: Overall system diagram of ONI. Our additions to Sample Factory are highlighted in blue.
We added an asynchronously executing LLM server and learned reward function, and connect them
back into the main learning process in a way that does not hurt the overall throughput of the policy
and value learning.
adequately handles policy staleness and data transfers between these components. Concretely for
NetHack, by running 480 environment instances APPO collects approximately 32k environment
interactions per second on a Tesla A100-80GB GPU with 48 CPUs. For online reward learning
via LLM annotations in this system1, we added 1) an LLM server hosted on a separate node, 2)
an asynchronously running process that passes observation captions to the LLM server via HTTP
request, 3) a hash table that stores the captions and corresponding LLM annotations, and 4) learning
code that dynamically updates a reward model that learns on these annotations. Without being
asynchronous, these components have the potential to block the concurrent execution and can reduce
the throughput of the overall system, because calling into an LLM and updating the reward model are
time-consuming. We added them in a way that retains most of the throughput (!), approximately 80-
95% of the original: the average throughput is 30k environment interactions per second if we do not
train any additional reward model to distill the LLM annotations, and 26k if a classification-based
reward model is learned at the same time (see Section 3.2 for the description of those approaches).
The throughput of LLM annotation depends on the actual LLM and prompt we are using. For
the reader’s reference, when hosting a LLaMA-3.1-8B server on a Tesla A100-80GB GPU using
the prompt displayed in Section B, ONI annotates approximately 810k NetHack captions over the
whole training process (2B environment steps, 19-20 hours). The rest of this section overviews the
relevant components and how we have modified them.
Background: APPO’s Distributed Execution and Shared Memory APPO has three main types
of workers:
1. the learner worker that coordinates most of the operations, updates the policy and value models,
and sends the latest policy ID to the other workers so that they can retrieve it;
2. the rollout workers that run copies of the environment, execute actions in them and save the
observations; and
3. the policy workers that query the policy on new states. The policy workers are separate from the
rollout workers so they can efficiently batch across observations.
1The prior work by Klissarov et al. (2023) in the offline setting was able to connect their intrinsic reward function into
Sample Factory’s APPO implementation with a few lines of code, as it just needed to load the PyTorch module of the learned
reward function.
Online Intrinsic Rewards for Decision Making Agents from Large Language Model Feedback
The workers here are individual processes forked off from a parent process. These all have shared
CPU and GPU memory buffers, and efficiently communicate mostly via Python’s multiprocessing
queues, using pointers to locations in the shared memory. We next describe our new LLM worker,
and how we connect it back into the learner.
Our New Asynchronous LLM Worker and Remote LLM Server This worker has input and
output queues that communicate back with the learner process, which we use in a way that does not
block the main execution of the system. The LLM worker awaits new observations to label from
the input queue, formats them into prompts, calls into an LLM, and returns the annotations in the
output queue. Additionally, the prompt templates and other LLM options are configured by the LLM
worker. We use an annotation and message format that support all the intrinsic reward labels that we
consider in Section 3.2. As Sample Factory already utilizes most of the free CPU and GPU capacity
of the system, we opted to call into the LLM via an HTTP/REST interface rather than loading it in
this process directly. The communication here adds minimal overhead, and also avoids the need to
coordinate the shared memory of multiple GPUs between the main APPO code and LLM. Alongside
every APPO run, we allocate an unloaded machine with a new instance of vLLM (Kwon et al.,
2023b) to exclusively serve the queries from the RL run. Our system also allows using the same node
for both processes if computational resources allow, which further reduces communication costs.
One important design decision is that the asynchronous LLM server is only able to process a small
percentage of the overall observations encountered 2, because the environment rollout workers have
a much higher throughput than the LLM. An alternative design would be to block the main APPO
components and wait for the LLM to label more messages, but we find it more realistic to continue
running the policy and label messages as the LLM throughput allows. This also creates the problem
of needing to decide on what messages to send to the LLM: a last-in-first-out queue (LIFO), or
some uncertainty-based selection. For this work, we use LIFO for simplicity, but note that it would
be interesting to investigate alternate approaches in future work.
Our Modified Learner Lastly, we connect this new LLM worker back into the main learner, and
dynamically learn a reward model on the annotations obtained from it. To do this, we modified the
two threads of the learner worker:
1. the training thread is the main thread that a) aggregates the new trajectories from the latest
environment interactions; b) decides which new observations to send to the LLM; c) updates the
policy, value, and (now) our intrinsic reward model.
2. The feedback processing thread (in fact, the initial thread of the learner worker) receives the
latest annotations from the LLM worker and updates the dataset (or hash table) that the reward
model is trained on. This thread also initializes the reward model at the beginning.
To prevent overfitting the limited amount of annotations in the early stage of training, the training
thread only continuously updates the reward model after we receive 25k annotations. Before that,
the feedback processing thread runs a few updates of the reward model every time we receive new
annotations. Now that we have a flexible way of annotating messages and fitting a reward model on
top of them, we turn to defining the types of intrinsic reward functions.
3.2 Intrinsic Reward Functions
ONI offers flexible algorithmic choices for querying an LLM and distilling its feedback. In this
work, we consider the following three methods.
Retrieval The simplest approach we consider uses binary labeling and retrieval. The LLM is asked
to assign a binary label yi ∈ {0, 1} indicating whether a caption ci is “helpful” or “unhelpful” for
making progress on the task. The learner worker maintains a hash table H to store labeled pairs
(ci, yi), managed by the feedback processing thread. In the training thread, each time the RL agent
2often ≤ 0.04% for a LLaMA-3.1-8B instance using a single A100-80GB GPU, or ≤ 0.02% when using a V100-32GB
GPU
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
receives an observation ot with caption ct, we check if ct ∈ H and the intrinsic reward is defined as:
rint(ot) =
(
H(ct) if ct ∈ H
0 if ct /∈ H (2)
If ct is unlabeled, it is placed into a last-in-first-out (LIFO) queue Q managed by the LLM annotation
process, and then sent to the LLM server. The LLM continuously processes elements ci from Q and
returns their labels yi to the data processing thread of the learner worker, where the pairs (ci, yi) are
added into H. As described in Section 3.1, the training thread and the feedback processing thread
run asynchronously. Therefore, editing the hash table does not slow down policy training. This
retrieval-based approach does not generalize to observations with unlabeled captions. However, the
resulting intrinsic reward is simple and hyperparameter-free, and may work well when the set of
captions belongs to a relatively small set.
Classification The second approach we consider is based on binary labeling together with training
a classification model. Similarly to above, we label observation captions ci with labels yi ∈ {0, 1}
indicating whether they are helpful or unhelpful via LLM. We simultaneously train a binary clas-
sification model to predict yi from oi. More precisely, we model P (y = 1|o) by rint
ϕ : O → [0, 1],
which is then used to compute the binary intrinsic reward by thresholding it at η:
rint(ot) = I[rint
ϕ (ot) > η], (3)
where I is the indicator function. We study the impact of η in Section 5.3. Unlike the previous
approach, this method has the potential to generalize to observations whose captions are similar,
but not identical, to the captions labeled by the LLM. However, like the previous approach, it will
assign a same reward to observations which are slightly positive (such as finding a few gold pieces
in NetHack) and very positive (finding hundreds of gold pieces or a rare artifact).
Ranking The third approach we consider is based on ranking observations via pairwise classifi-
cation, which is the approach taken by Motif. Here, pairs of observations (o1, o2) are sent to the
LLM, which returns a preference label y ∈ {1, 2, ∅} indicating whether o1 or o2 is more desirable
for accomplishing the task, or if they are equivalent. A reward model rint
ϕ : O → R is trained by
minimizing the negative log-likelihood :
−E(o1,o2,y)∼H
h
I[y = 1] + 1
2 I[y = ∅]

log Pϕ(o1 ≻ o2) +

I[y = 2] + 1
2 I[y = ∅]

log Pϕ(o1 ≺ o2)
i
(4)
where we use average log-likelihood when y = ∅3 and use the Bradley-Terry model (Bradley &
Terry, 1952) Pϕ(o1 ≻ o2) = exp rint
ϕ (o1)/ exp rint
ϕ (o1) + exp rint
ϕ (o2). Motif computes
the mean μD , standard deviation σD , and a fixed quantile νD of rint
ϕ over the offline dataset of
annotations D. During RL training, it normalizes and thresholds rint
ϕ to give the reward
rint
motif(ot) = I[(rint
ϕ (ot) − μD )/σD > νD ] · (rint
ϕ (ot) − μD )/σD (5)
For ONI-ranking, applying these steps directly is not possible since the annotation dataset is con-
tinuously changing. We thus replace (μD , σD ) by a running mean and standard deviation (μ, σ)
computed over the experience, and replace the quantile νD by a quantile of the standard normal.
4 Related Work
Exploration Based on Novelty Bonuses Learning from sparse or otherwise difficult-to-optimize
reward functions is a long-standing problem in reinforcement learning. There is a large body of
work which defines intrinsic rewards based on novelty bonuses (Schmidhuber, 1991; Kearns &
Singh, 2002; Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002; Stadie et al., 2015; Bellemare et al., 2016; Pathak
et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019; Shyam et al., 2019; Raileanu & Rocktäschel, 2020; Ecoffet et al.,
3In the equivalent cross entropy minimization formulation, this amounts to using a uniform target [ 1
2 , 1
2 ] when y = ∅.
Online Intrinsic Rewards for Decision Making Agents from Large Language Model Feedback
2019; Agarwal et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Henaff et al., 2022a; Lu et al., 2024). These methods
tend to make minimal assumptions about the task at hand, operate online without requiring external
data, and sometimes come with theoretical guarantees. However, since they are fundamentally
tabula-rasa, they must rediscover much of the structure in the task that might already be encoded
as prior knowledge in an LLM. Therefore, they tend to have difficulty exploring environments of
very high complexity, such as NetHack, in a tractable amount of time (Klissarov et al., 2023).
LLM-aided Reward Design In addition to Motif (Klissarov et al., 2023), several works have sought
to leverage the prior knowledge encoded in LLMs to produce intrinsic rewards. Eureka (Ma et al.,
2023), Auto-MC (Li et al., 2024), L2R (Yu et al., 2023) and Text2Reward (Xie et al., 2023) all use
LLMs to generate executable code which computes intrinsic rewards from the underlying environ-
ment state, conditioned on a task description. The generated reward function code is then iteratively
improved based on aggregate statistics from agents trained with the current reward. However, a
disadvantage with intrinsic rewards represented as code is that they require access to an interpretable
underlying state representation, and it is unclear how to leverage non-numerical features such as
those provided by unstructured language captions. The works of Kwon et al. (2023a); Chu et al.
(2023) also successfully used LLMs conditioned on task descriptions to directly generate binary
rewards in an online manner, and did not train a reward model. This was possible due to evaluating
on environments and tasks which could be solved with a relatively small number of observations,
whereas we consider complex open-ended environments with billions of observations so that
labeling them all with an LLM would be computationally infeasible. Also of note is the work of Wu
et al. (2024), which additionally conditioned LLMs on user manuals to define the intrinsic reward.
Goal-conditioned Reward Design A different approach to reward function design is to define re-
wards as the distance between the agent’s current state and the goal. For example, one line of
work learns a state embedding in a self-supervised manner which converts geodesic distances in the
original space to Euclidean distances in feature space (Wu et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021; Gomez
et al., 2024). Another line of work of (Fan et al., 2022; Rocamonde et al., 2023; Adeniji et al.,
2023; Kim et al., 2024) leverages pretrained image and text encoders, and defines rewards to be
some measure of similarity between embeddings of visual observations and embeddings of textual
task descriptions. Using a question generation and answering system, Carta et al. (2022) extract
auxiliary objectives from the goal description and construct intrinsic rewards. An interesting com-
bination of goal-conditioned and LLM-aided reward design is the ELLM approach introduced in Du
et al. (2023b), which generates candidate goals and uses the distance in LLM embedding space to
define the reward. This approach shares the limitations of the works of Kwon et al. (2023a); Chu
et al. (2023) discussed in the previous section, in that it requires an LLM call for each agent obser-
vation, which becomes computationally infeasible in high-throughput settings involving billions of
observations. We discuss more works that utilize LLM for RL broadly in Section D.
5 Experiments
Environment We use the NetHack Learning Environment (NLE) (Küttler et al., 2020) as our
experimental testbed, since it is one of the most challenging open-ended, long horizon and sparse
reward environments available, and was also used as the main environment in the prior work we
compare to. NetHack is a classic dungeon crawling game which presents a number of interesting
challenges for RL agents: it is procedurally generated, requiring generalization; rewards are sparse
for most tasks, requiring exploration; the environment is partially rather than fully observable;
transitions are naturally stochastic; episodes are very long, requiring tens to hundreds of thousands
of steps to win the game; the dynamics are highly complex, involving large numbers monsters,
objects, non-player characters and other entities. Succeeding in the game requires mastering and
balancing diverse behaviors including exploration, resource management, object use, combat,
puzzle solving and skill progression. We used the environment settings from (Klissarov et al.,
2025), which include macros for eating, quaffing potions, enhancing skills and casting spells.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
Tasks and Metrics We evaluate our agents in two ways: how well they are able to succeed in tasks
which have a (typically sparse) extrinsic reward, and how well they are able to progress in the game
using the intrinsic reward only. For the former, we use one dense reward task and three sparse reward
tasks used in prior work (Küttler et al., 2020; Klissarov et al., 2023), listed below.
1. The Score task treats the in-game score4 as a dense extrinsic reward.
2. The Oracle task requires finding the in-game Oracle character, which resides deep in the dun-
geon. The agent receives a reward of 50 if it manages to reach the Oracle, zero otherwise.
3. The StaircaseLvl3 and StaircaseLvl4 tasks require reaching the third or fourth level
staircase and zero otherwise—this requires exploring multiple levels in order to find staircases
which lead deeper into the dungeon, while fighting or escaping monsters to survive.
Previous work found that the Oracle task can be solved in unexpected ways via reward hacking;
however, this is still a challenging sparse reward problem and we include it for completeness. We
also train agents with the intrinsic reward only and measure the game progress via four metrics:
experience level, dungeon level, gold, and scout (number of unique locations explored).
Removing the extrinsic reward gives us a clearer picture of what the intrinsic rewards are prioritizing.
Methods and Hyperparameters We instantiate ONI with the three reward functions described
in Section 3.2. We name the three approaches ONI-retrieval, ONI-classification and
ONI-ranking, respectively. For policy learning, we use the Chaotic Dwarven GPT5 (CDGPT5)
architecture (Myffili, 2021) used in prior work (Piterbarg et al., 2023; Kurenkov et al., 2023; Klis-
sarov et al., 2023). Architecture details can be found in Section A.1. All the methods are trained
with two billion (2 × 109) environment steps. We train ONI-classification with with classifi-
cation threshold η = 0.5, where the intrinsic reward coefficient is β = 0.1 for the Score task and
β = 0.4 for all the other sparse-reward tasks and the reward-free agent. Similarly, ONI-retrieval
uses β = 0.1 for Score and β = 0.5 for the others. ONI-ranking is trained with β = 0.05 and
νN = 0. Full details of the training process can be found in Section A.2.
LLMs We use the LLaMA-3 herd of models (Dubey et al., 2024) as our LLMs. All prompts are
listed in Section B. We initially reran the Motif baseline using the official code5 and compared
the performance of LLaMA-3.1-70B-Instruct and LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct (see Section C.1). We
did not observe a significant difference in their performance on the Oracle or Score tasks.
Therefore, we use LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct in our subsequent experiments to reduce computation.
Baselines We compare to 3 baselines: i) agents trained with extrinsic reward alone, ii) Motif (Klis-
sarov et al., 2023), and iii) a variant of the ELLM algorithm (Du et al., 2023a). It is not feasible to
directly apply ELLM to our setting, since it requires an LLM call for each observation, where the
total number of calls scales to the billions in our case. Therefore, we designed a more scalable
variant which i) replaces the LLM embedding with a lightweight bag-of-words embedding 6 using
FastText (Bojanowski et al., 2016), and ii) includes an episodic term in the intrinsic reward, as with
Motif and ONI (see Section A.2). We call it ELLM-BoW and include more details in Appendix A.3.
We note that Klissarov et al. (2023) found that other exploration methods based on novelty bonuses
such as RND (Burda et al., 2019), NovelD (Zhang et al., 2021) and E3B (Henaff et al., 2022a) did
not improve over the extrinsic reward baseline on these tasks, hence we do not include them.
5.1 Main Results
Task Performance We report the average performance and 95% confidence intervals computed
via standard errors over 5 seeds in Figure 3a. The extrinsic reward agent performs reasonably well
4https://nethackwiki.com/wiki/Score
5https://github.com/facebookresearch/motif
6We also tried using Sentence Transformers (SBERT) for generating sentence embeddings, which led to an approximately
20x throughput drop: 28k vs 1.4k FPS on a Tesla V100-32GB GPU, when the sentence embeddings can be cached. If we
recompute the sentence embedding in the forward pass every time, the throughput drop is approximately 100x.
Online Intrinsic Rewards for Decision Making Agents from Large Language Model Feedback
(a) Performance on four different NetHack tasks.
(b) Game progress of intrinsic rewards only agents.
Figure 3: ONI-based methods are able to match or closely track the performance of Motif without
using an pre-collected dataset. This includes (a) reward-based and (b) reward-free settings. Mo-
tif’s pre-collected dataset uses privileged information about dense reward functions to solve sparse-
reward or reward-free environments while ONI-methods do not. ELLM-BoW demonstrated to be a
competitive baseline here too.
on the dense Score task, but completely fails on the others due to reward sparsity. We find that,
despite not requiring any external data, our ONI-classification agent is able to match Motif on
all tasks except Oracle, where it still performs well. We note that Motif requires pre-collecting
data from the Score task even for sparse reward tasks—this assumes access to an additional dense
reward function, which is an often unrealistic assumption. It also incurs an additional one billion
(109) environment samples prior to policy training. All of our agents significantly outperform the
extrinsic only baseline on the sparse reward tasks, demonstrating they are able to explore effectively
while synthesizing their intrinsic rewards from online data alone.
Despite its simplicity, ONI-retrieval performs surprisingly well, and its performance is often
close to that of ONI-classification. This is likely a consequence of many messages with
positive valence being repeated in the early game of NetHack, such as “You find a hidden passage”
that allows exploring the rest of the level, or “You kill the {monster}!” which leads to experience
gain. ONI-classification, which also predicts binary rewards but is able to generalize to
unseen messages, provides a modest but consistent improvement over ONI-retrieval across all
environments. This suggests that learning a reward model is indeed helpful. We would expect this
gap to increase in settings with added noise or caption diversity, since they increase the likelihood
of observed captions being unique.
We do not observe any significant gains from using ONI-ranking over ONI-classification,
despite it being more conceptually general and able to represent a continuous range of intrinsic
rewards rather than binary values. This may be because our tasks take place at the very earliest
part of the game of NetHack, where only a small fraction of all possible messages are observed,
which would also explain the relatively strong performance of ONI-retrieval. We hypothesize
that more benefits will appear in settings with higher observation diversity.
ELLM-BoW performs quite well on these tasks, closely tracking or matching Motif and ONI methods.
However, in Section 5.2 we highlight a fundamental limitation of ELLM-BoW, namely its inability to
capture complex semantic meaning, whereas ONI is capable thanks to its use of an LLM. It is worth
noting that directly using ELLM-BoW as in Du et al. (2023a) without our episodic bonus completely
fails, see Section C.2.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
Game Progress of Intrinsic-Reward-Only Agents Results for all methods trained in the reward-
free setting are shown in Figure 3b. All of our ONI methods are able to make meaningful progress
across all metrics. In particular, ONI-classification outperforms Motif on 3 out of 4 metrics.
We include the results of Motif for reference, yet emphasize it is actually inapplicable in a truly
reward-free setup since it assumes access to dense rewards.
5.2 Comparisons for More Complex Goals
Even though ELLM-BoW performs well in Section 5.1, we have found that it does not capture the
semantic meanings of more complex goal strings due to the simple bag-of-word representation. To
demonstrate this, we train ELLM-BoW and ONI-retrieval for two opposite goals in the extrinsic-
reward-free environment: (Gold) “collect gold but do not kill monsters” vs (Combat) “kill monsters
but do not collect gold”. Figure 4 shows that ELLM-BoW produces two agents of nearly identical
behavior in terms of collected gold and killed monsters. In contrast, ONI-retrieval is able to
distinguish the two goals and produces agents that emphasize either combat engagement or gold
collection, depending on the goal string. See Section B.1 for the goal strings for ELLM-BoW and
prompts for ONI-retrieval.
(a) ELLM-BoW under 2 different goals (b) ONI-classification under 2 different goals
Figure 4: (a) ELLM-BoW is not able to understand the semantic meaning of complex goals, resulting
in agents with similar behavior under the combat and the gold goal. (b) ONI-retrieval can
distinguish the goals and the resulting agents focus on different aspects of game progress.
5.3 Ablation Studies
Performance vs. LLM Annotation Throughput We compared agents trained on the Score and
Oracle tasks using either 1 or 4 V100 GPUs in the LLM server node. As shown in Figure 5,
using 4 GPUs rather than 1 significantly increases the number of annotated observations, but does
not significantly change the performance. This suggests that many of the labelled examples may
contain redundant information, which is not useful for updating the reward model. Designing more
sophisticated prioritization schemes, which can select maximally informative examples to send to
the LLM, constitutes an interesting direction for future work.
Figure 5: Performance remains comparable despite doubling LLM annotation throughput.
ONI-ranking’s throughput is lower than the others due to annotating pairs of captions.
Online Intrinsic Rewards for Decision Making Agents from Large Language Model Feedback
Performance when Reducing LLM Annotations Thus far we have been using all LLM annotations
available. It is also intriguing to check the performance when we limit the volume of annotations, to
simulate more resource-constrained settings. Here we subsample the LLM-annotated messages with
rate 0.1 and 0.01 before sending them back to the hash table. Figure 6 shows that the performance
of ONI-retrieval significantly drops with rate 0.01, whereas ONI-classification remains
comparable. This suggests that using a parametric reward model can help reduce the number of
annotations required thanks to its generalization ability.
Figure 6: Performance of ONI-retrieval plunges when the subsampling rate reduces to 0.01,
while performance of ONI-classification is still comparable with the original one.
See Appendix C.3 for additional ablations studying hyperparameters and sampling mechanisms.
6 Conclusion
We have introduced ONI, a distributed online intrinsic reward and agent learning system. We
showed that we are able to match the state of the art across a range of challenging sparse reward tasks
from the NetHack Learning Environment, while removing the need for a large pre-collected dataset
or auxiliary dense reward function required by previous work. We explored three different instan-
tiations of our system of varying levels of complexity and generality, and study their tradeoffs. Our
work paves the way for intrinsic reward methods which can learn purely from agent experience, are
not constrained by external dataset size or quality, and can leverage high-performance RL training.
References
Ademi Adeniji, Amber Xie, Carmelo Sferrazza, Younggyo Seo, Stephen James, and Pieter Abbeel.
Language reward modulation for pretraining reinforcement learning, 2023. URL https://
arxiv.org/abs/2308.12270.
Alekh Agarwal, Mikael Henaff, Sham Kakade, and Wen Sun. Pc-pg: Policy cover directed explo-
ration for provable policy gradient learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
33:13399–13412, 2020.
Michael Ahn et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances, 2022. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.01691.
Marc G. Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Rémi
Munos. Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. In Proceedings of the 30th
International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’16, pp. 1479–1487,
Red Hook, NY, USA, 2016. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781510838819.
Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. Enriching word vectors
with subword information. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.04606, 2016.
Serena Booth, W Bradley Knox, Julie Shah, Scott Niekum, Peter Stone, and Alessandro Allievi.
The perils of trial-and-error reward design: Misdesign through overfitting and invalid task spec-
ifications. In Proceedings of the 37th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), Feb
2023.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
Ronen I. Brafman and Moshe Tennenholtz. R-MAX - A general polynomial time algorithm for
near-optimal reinforcement learning. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 3:213–231, 2002.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Yuji Cao, Huan Zhao, Yuheng Cheng, Ting Shu, Guolong Liu, Gaoqi Liang, Junhua Zhao, and Yun
Li. Survey on large language model-enhanced reinforcement learning: Concept, taxonomy, and
methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00282, 2024.
Thomas Carta, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Olivier Sigaud, and Sylvain Lamprier. Eager: Asking and
answering questions for automatic reward shaping in language-guided rl. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 35:12478–12490, 2022.
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Çaglar Gülçehre, Fethi Bougares, Holger Schwenk, and
Yoshua Bengio. Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical ma-
chine translation. CoRR, abs/1406.1078, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.
1078.
Kun Chu, Xufeng Zhao, Cornelius Weber, Mengdi Li, and Stefan Wermter. Accelerating reinforce-
ment learning of robotic manipulations via feedback from large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.02379, 2023.
Djork-Arné Clevert, Thomas Unterthiner, and Sepp Hochreiter. Fast and accurate deep net-
work learning by exponential linear units (elus). In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.),
ICLR, 2016. URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/iclr/iclr2016.html#
ClevertUH15.
Danny Driess, , et al. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal language model. In arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.03378, 2023.
Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Zihan Wang, Cédric Colas, Trevor Darrell, Pieter Abbeel, Abhishek
Gupta, and Jacob Andreas. Guiding pretraining in reinforcement learning with large language
models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8657–8677. PMLR, 2023a.
Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Zihan Wang, Cédric Colas, Trevor Darrell, Pieter Abbeel, Abhishek
Gupta, and Jacob Andreas. Guiding pretraining in reinforcement learning with large language
models. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan
Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8657–8677.
PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023b. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/du23f.
html.
Abhimanyu Dubey et al. The llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2407.21783.
Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, and Jeff Clune. Go-explore: a
new approach for hard-exploration problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.10995, 2019.
Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew
Tang, De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. Minedojo: Building open-ended em-
bodied agents with internet-scale knowledge. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2022. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=rc8o_j8I8PX.
Online Intrinsic Rewards for Decision Making Agents from Large Language Model Feedback
Diego Gomez, Michael Bowling, and Marlos C. Machado. Proper laplacian representation learning,
2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.10833.
Mikael Henaff, Roberta Raileanu, Minqi Jiang, and Tim Rocktäschel. Exploration via elliptical
episodic bonuses. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.),
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022a.
Mikael Henaff, Roberta Raileanu, Minqi Jiang, and Tim Rocktäschel. Exploration via elliptical
episodic bonuses. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:37631–37646, 2022b.
Sinan Ibrahim, Mostafa Mostafa, Ali Jnadi, and Pavel Osinenko. Comprehensive overview of re-
ward engineering and shaping in advancing reinforcement learning applications. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.10215, 2024.
Dominik Jeurissen, Diego Perez-Liebana, Jeremy Gow, Duygu Cakmak, and James Kwan. Playing
nethack with llms: Potential & limitations as zero-shot agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.00690,
2024.
Michael Kearns and Satinder Singh. Near-optimal reinforcement learning in polynomial time. In
Machine Learning, pp. 209–232. Morgan Kaufmann, 2002.
Changyeon Kim, Younggyo Seo, Hao Liu, Lisa Lee, Jinwoo Shin, Honglak Lee, and Kimin Lee.
Guide your agent with adaptive multimodal rewards. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 36, 2024.
Diederik P Kingma. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
2014.
Martin Klissarov, Pierluca D’Oro, Shagun Sodhani, Roberta Raileanu, Pierre-Luc Bacon, Pascal
Vincent, Amy Zhang, and Mikael Henaff. Motif: Intrinsic motivation from artificial intelligence
feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.00166, 9 2023.
Martin Klissarov, Mikael Henaff, Roberta Raileanu, Shagun Sodhani, Pascal Vincent, Amy Zhang,
Pierre-Luc Bacon, Doina Precup, Marlos C. Machado, and Pierluca D’Oro. Maestromotif:
Skill design from artificial intelligence feedback. 2025. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=or8mMhmyRV.
Vladislav Kurenkov, Alexander Nikulin, Denis Tarasov, and Sergey Kolesnikov. Katakomba: Tools
and benchmarks for data-driven nethack, 2023.
Heinrich Küttler, Nantas Nardelli, Alexander H. Miller, Roberta Raileanu, Marco Selvatici, Edward
Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. The NetHack Learning Environment. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Minae Kwon, Sang Michael Xie, Kalesha Bullard, and Dorsa Sadigh. Reward design with language
models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023a. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=10uNUgI5Kl.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E.
Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles, 2023b.
Hao Li, Xue Yang, Zhaokai Wang, Xizhou Zhu, Jie Zhou, Yu Qiao, Xiaogang Wang, Hongsheng Li,
Lewei Lu, and Jifeng Dai. Auto mc-reward: Automated dense reward design with large language
models for minecraft. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 16426–16435, 2024.
Cong Lu, Shengran Hu, and Jeff Clune. Intelligent go-explore: Standing on the shoulders of giant
foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15143, 2024.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
Yecheng Jason Ma, William Liang, Guanzhi Wang, De-An Huang, Osbert Bastani, Dinesh Jayara-
man, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Eureka: Human-level reward design via
coding large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2310.12931, 2023.
Anssi Myffili. Nle challenge baseline using sample-factory. https://github.com/
Miffyli/nle-sample-factory-baseline, 2021.
Andrew Y. Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart J. Russell. Policy invariance under reward transformations:
Theory and application to reward shaping. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, ICML ’99, pp. 278–287, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1999. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc. ISBN 1558606122.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
by self-supervised prediction. CoRR, abs/1705.05363, 2017.
Aleksei Petrenko, Zhehui Huang, Tushar Kumar, Gaurav S. Sukhatme, and Vladlen Koltun. Sam-
ple factory: Egocentric 3d control from pixels at 100000 FPS with asynchronous reinforcement
learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
search, pp. 7652–7662. PMLR, 2020. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/
petrenko20a.html.
Ulyana Piterbarg, Lerrel Pinto, and Rob Fergus. Nethack is hard to hack. In Thirty-seventh Confer-
ence on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=tp2nEZ5zfP.
Roberta Raileanu and Tim Rocktäschel. Ride: Rewarding impact-driven exploration for
procedurally-generated environments. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2020.
Jette Randlov and Preben Alstrøm. Learning to drive a bicycle using reinforcement learning and
shaping. pp. 463–471, 01 1998.
Juan Rocamonde, Victoriano Montesinos, Elvis Nava, Ethan Perez, and David Lindner. Vision-
language models are zero-shot reward models for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.12921, 2023.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. A possibility for implementing curiosity and boredom in model-building neu-
ral controllers. In Proc. of the international conference on simulation of adaptive behavior: From
animals to animats, pp. 222–227, 1991.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Pranav Shyam, Wojciech Ja´skowski, and Faustino Gomez. Model-based active exploration. In Ka-
malika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
5779–5788. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.
Satinder Singh, Richard L Lewis, Andrew G Barto, and Jonathan Sorg. Intrinsically motivated
reinforcement learning: An evolutionary perspective. IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental
Development, 2(2):70–82, 2010.
Jonathan Sorg, Satinder P Singh, and Richard L Lewis. Internal rewards mitigate agent boundedness.
In Proceedings of the 27th international conference on machine learning (ICML-10), pp. 1007–
1014, 2010.
Bradly C Stadie, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Incentivizing exploration in reinforcement
learning with deep predictive models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.00814, 2015.
Online Intrinsic Rewards for Decision Making Agents from Large Language Model Feedback
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press,
second edition, 2018. URL http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.
html.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language mod-
els. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=ehfRiF0R3a.
Kaixin Wang, Kuangqi Zhou, Qixin Zhang, Jie Shao, Bryan Hooi, and Jiashi Feng. Towards bet-
ter laplacian representation in reinforcement learning with generalized graph drawing. CoRR,
abs/2107.05545, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.05545.
Yifan Wu, George Tucker, and Ofir Nachum. The laplacian in RL: Learning representations with
efficient approximations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=HJlNpoA5YQ.
Yue Wu, Yewen Fan, Paul Pu Liang, Amos Azaria, Yuanzhi Li, and Tom M Mitchell. Read and
reap the rewards: Learning to play atari with the help of instruction manuals. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Tianbao Xie, Siheng Zhao, Chen Henry Wu, Yitao Liu, Qian Luo, Victor Zhong, Yanchao Yang, and
Tao Yu. Text2reward: Automated dense reward function generation for reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11489, 2023.
Wenhao Yu, Nimrod Gileadi, Chuyuan Fu, Sean Kirmani, Kuang-Huei Lee, Montse Gonzalez Are-
nas, Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Tom Erez, Leonard Hasenclever, Jan Humplik, et al. Language to
rewards for robotic skill synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08647, 2023.
Tianjun Zhang, Huazhe Xu, Xiaolong Wang, Yi Wu, Kurt Keutzer, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Yuan-
dong Tian. Noveld: A simple yet effective exploration criterion. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin,
P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2021.
Xiang Zhang, Junbo Jake Zhao, and Yann LeCun. Character-level convolutional networks for
text classification. CoRR, abs/1509.01626, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.
01626.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
A Experimental Details
A.1 Architectures
Our architectures largely follow those used in Klissarov et al. (2023).
Our policy network uses the Chaotic Dwarven GPT5 architecture originally introduced in Myf-
fili (2021). This architecture combines convolutional layers processing the top-down visible map
centered at the agent with fully-connected layers processing messages and bottom-line statistics
including hit points, experience, hunger level and the like. The convolutional encoder has 3 con-
volutional layers with 32, 64, 128 feature maps respectively, interleaved with exponential linear unit
(ELU) non-linearities (Clevert et al., 2016). Messages and bottom-line statistics are each processed
with 2-layer MLPs with 128 hidden units each. All embeddings are combined, passed through a
single-layer MLP with 512 hidden units, and then passed to a recurrent GRU module (Cho et al.,
2014) with 512 hidden units. Finally, this hidden representation feeds into linear critic and actor
heads.
Our reward model The reward model of ONI-ranking is based on the encoder from Küttler et al.
(2020) that processes both state representation and messages. Messages are processed by a 5-layer
character-level CNN (Zhang et al., 2015) with 64 feature maps at each layer. The first, second and
last layers are interleaved with max-pooling layers with kernel size and stride 3. The output is then
passed through a 3-layer MLP with 128, 256, 512 hidden units at each layer respectively, and ReLU
non-linearities, followed by a scalar output. The reward model of ONI-classification only process
messages, using the same architecture described above.
A.2 Hyperparameters
Following Klissarov et al. (2023), we scale the environment reward by 0.1 for the Score task and
by 10 for the other sparse reward tasks, and use normalized intrinsic reward
rint
normalized(ot) = rint(ot)/N (ct)z , (6)
where N (ct) is the number of times the caption ct has been found in one episode. For all our
experiments, we use z = 3.0. This is also called the episodic bonus (Henaff et al., 2022b).
For ONI-classification and ONI-ranking, we train the reward model using the Adam opti-
mizer (Kingma, 2014) with batch size 256. ONI-classification is trained with learning rate
0.0001, classification threshold η = 0.5, β = 0.1 for the Score task and β = 0.4 for the others.
ONI-ranking is trained with 0.00001, β = 0.05 and νN = 0 (mean of the standard normal distri-
bution). ONI-retrieval does not train a reward model, and we use β = 0.1 for the Score task
and β = 0.5 for the others.
Table 1 shows the APPO hyperparameters which are common to all experiments and Table 2 in-
cludes the hyperparameters for the online LLM annotation.
Hyperparameter Value
Number of Parallel Environment Instances 480
Batch Size 4096
PPO Clip Ratio 0.1
PPO Clip Value 1.0
PPO Epochs 1
Max Gradient Norm 4.0
Value Loss Coefficient 0.5
Exploration Loss entropy
Table 1: Common APPO hyperparameters across all experiments.
Online Intrinsic Rewards for Decision Making Agents from Large Language Model Feedback
Hyperparameter Value
LLM Model LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct
Temperature 0.1
Max tokens to generate 4096
Annotation Batch Size 100
Table 2: LLM annotation hyperparameters.
A.3 Implementation Details for ELLM-BoW
For any piece of text c, we construct an embedding vector by first applying the FastText tokenizer
(Bojanowski et al., 2016) to the text, separating it into words c = (w1, ..., wm). We then retrieve the
FastText word embeddings x1, ..., xm for each word, and compute their sum embed(c) = Pm
i=1 xi.
The intrinsic reward is then defined by the cosine distance between the embeddings of the caption
of the current observation and the goal, weighted by an episodic count-based term::
r(ot) = 1
Ne(ct)z · embed(ct) · embed(g)
∥embed(ct)∥ · ∥embed(g)∥
We include the episodic term for consistency with Motif and ONI. In Section C.2, we ablate this
choice and show that it is essential for good performance.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
B Prompts
Here we include all the LLM prompts we use. The system prompt and the prompt for ONI-ranking
are identical to the ones used in Klissarov et al. (2023). We adapted these to produce labels for single
observations for ONI-retrieval and ONI-classification.
System Prompt (used by all methods)
You are a helpful and honest judge of good gameplaying and progress in the NetHack
game. Always answer as helpfully as possible, while being truthful.
If you don’t know the answer to a question, please don’t share false information.
Prompt for ONI-retrieval and ONI-classification
Context: I am playing NetHack and I will present you a message from the gameplay.
Instruction: First, tell me about your knowledge of NetHack. Mention the goal of
NetHack.
Then, write an analysis describing the semantics of each message using your
knowledge of NetHack. Finally, respond by assigning a score to the message, which
measures whether the status represented by the message is helpful or unhelpful to
make some progress towards the goal.
Helpful here does not mean whether it is informative to the player to make
decisions or not, but whether it is helpful for the agent to solve the game.
I prefer agents that maximize the score in the game, for instance by killing
monsters, collecting gold or going down the stairs in the dungeon.
For extremely helpful messages, assign a label FOO. For unhelpful, neutral, and
lukewarm messages, assign a label BAR.
Example 1: "You kill the goblin! Welcome to experience level 4" indicates that
the player
has killed a goblin and gained experience. This led to a level up and increased
abilities.
Gaining experience and leveling up are both extremely helpful and this message
should be labelled as FOO.
Example 2: "You hear someone counting money." indicates that the player is close
to a source of gold, as the sound of counting money suggests a nearby NPC or
monster with treasure.
This is also extremely helpful and should be labelled as FOO.
Example 3: "5 gold pieces." indicates you collected 5 gold coins. This is
extremely helpful should be labelled as FOO.
Example 4: "That door is closed." is neutral and should be labelled as BAR.
Please rate this message: {{"{}"}}
Constraint: Please format your response strictly in this format without additional
explanation:
<knowledge> [your knowledge of NetHack] </knowledge>
<analysis> [your one-sentence analysis of the message] </analysis>
<label> [FOO/BAR] </label>
Online Intrinsic Rewards for Decision Making Agents from Large Language Model Feedback
Prompt for ONI-ranking
I will present you with two short gameplay descriptions.
First, tell me about your knowledge of NetHack. Mention the goal of NetHack.
Prefer agents that maximize the score in the game, for instance by killing
monsters, collecting gold or going down the stairs in the dungeon.
Then, write an analysis describing the semantics of each description strictly
using information from the descriptions (which may be empty) and your knowledge of
NetHack.
Provide a comparative analysis based on first principles.
Finally, respond by explicitly declaring which one is the most likely to make some
progress towards the goal, writing either ("best_description": 1), ("
best_description": 2). You could also say ("best_description": None).
{{
"description_1":
"{}"
}}
{{
"description_2":
"{}"
}}
B.1 Goal String and Prompts used in Section 5.2
For the experiments in Section 5.2, we use the goal strings from (Klissarov et al., 2023) used to
induce different behaviors in agents, such as the Gold Collector, Monster Slayer or Descender.
These goal string explicitly aim to maximize one metric while minimize the others. The default goal
string is the same used in ONI prompts.
B.1.1 Prompt used for ELLM-BoW
Default Goal
Prefer agents that maximize the score in the game, for instance by killing
monsters, collecting gold or going down the stairs in the dungeon.
Combat Goal
Prefer agents that engage in combat, for instance by killing monsters. But never
prefer agents that collect ANY gold or that go down the dungeon.
Gold Goal
Prefer agents that maximize their gold. But never prefer agents that maximize the
score in other ways (e.g., by engaging in combat or killing monsters) or that go
down the dungeon.
B.1.2 Prompt used for ONI-retrieval
The prompt used for ONI methods have been modified to reflect the change of goals, which we list
in the next subsection. In addition to the changes of goal description, we use the same examples as
in Section B but changed its label.
Combat Goal
Context: I am playing NetHack and I will present you a message from the gameplay.
Instruction: First, tell me about your knowledge of NetHack. Mention the goal of
NetHack.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
Then, write an analysis describing the semantics of each message using your
knowledge of NetHack. Finally, respond by assigning a score to the message, which
measures whether the status represented by the message is helpful or unhelpful to
make some progress towards the goal.
Helpful here does not mean whether it is informative to the player to make
decisions or not, but whether it is helpful for the agent to solve the game.
I prefer agents engage in combat, for instance by killing monsters. But never
prefer agents that collect ANY gold or that go down the dungeon.
For extremely helpful messages, assign a label FOO. For unhelpful, neutral, and
lukewarm messages, assign a label BAR.
Example 1: "You kill the goblin! Welcome to experience level 4" indicates that
the player
has killed a goblin and gained experience. This led to a level up and increased
abilities.
Gaining experience and leveling up are both extremely helpful and this message
should be labelled as FOO.
Example 2: "You hear someone counting money." indicates that the player is close
to a source of gold, as the sound of counting money suggests a nearby NPC or
monster with treasure.
This is not helpful and should be labelled as BAR.
Example 3: "5 gold pieces." indicates you collected 5 gold coins. This is not
aligned with our goal and should be labelled as BAR.
Example 4: "That door is closed." is neutral and should be labelled as BAR.
Please rate this message: {{"{}"}}
Constraint: Please format your response strictly in this format without additional
explanation:
<knowledge> [your knowledge of NetHack] </knowledge>
<analysis> [your one-sentence analysis of the message] </analysis>
<label> [FOO/BAR] </label>
Gold Goal
Context: I am playing NetHack and I will present you a message from the gameplay.
Instruction: First, tell me about your knowledge of NetHack. Mention the goal of
NetHack.
Then, write an analysis describing the semantics of each message using your
knowledge of NetHack. Finally, respond by assigning a score to the message, which
measures whether the status represented by the message is helpful or unhelpful to
make some progress towards the goal.
Helpful here does not mean whether it is informative to the player to make
decisions or not, but whether it is helpful for the agent to solve the game.
I prefer agents that maximize their gold. But never prefer agents that maximize
the score in other ways (e.g., by engaging in combat or killing monsters) or that
go down the dungeon.
For extremely helpful messages, assign a label FOO. For unhelpful, neutral, and
lukewarm messages, assign a label BAR.
Example 1: "You kill the goblin! Welcome to experience level 4" indicates that
the player
has killed a goblin and gained experience. This is not aligned with our goal and
should be labelled as BAR.
Example 2: "You hear someone counting money." indicates that the player is close
to a source of gold, as the sound of counting money suggests a nearby NPC or
monster with treasure. This is extremely helpful and should be labelled as FOO.
Example 3: "5 gold pieces." indicates you collected 5 gold coins. This is
extremely helpful and should be labelled as FOO.
Example 4: "That door is closed." is neutral and should be labelled as BAR.
Online Intrinsic Rewards for Decision Making Agents from Large Language Model Feedback
Please rate this message: {{"{}"}}
Constraint: Please format your response strictly in this format without additional
explanation:
<knowledge> [your knowledge of NetHack] </knowledge>
<analysis> [your one-sentence analysis of the message] </analysis>
<label> [FOO/BAR] </label>
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
C Additional Results
C.1 LLaMA-3.1-70B-Instruct vs. LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct
In Figure 7, we compare the performance of Motif using two different sized LLMs on Score and
Oracle (LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct and LLaMA-3.1-70B-Instruct). Interestingly, we do not observe
a significant difference between the two. This is in contrast to the previous work of (Klissarov et al.,
2023), who found a significant difference between using LLaMA-2-70B-chat and LLaMA-2-7B-
chat. This suggest that the smaller 8B model is sufficient for evaluating messages on these tasks,
hence we use it in our experiments.
Figure 7: Performance of Motif using two different LLMs. Curves represent means and shaded
regions represent standard errors over 5 seeds.
C.2 Effect of the Episodic Term for ELLM-BoW
Our implementation of ELLM-BoW has included the episodic-count based normalization (6), which
is key to the performance of ELLM-BoW. Figure 8 shows that directly using ELLM-BoW as in Du
et al. (2023a) ELLM-BoW, without the episodic term, failed to make progress in all three tasks.
Figure 8: ELLM-BoW performs well when the intrinsic reward is normalized by an episodic-count
based term as in (6). Without it, the success rate is zero for all the three tasks.
Online Intrinsic Rewards for Decision Making Agents from Large Language Model Feedback
C.3 Additional Ablations
Figure 9: Performance of ONI-classification is comparable when the LLM server uses a Tesla
A100-80GB or V100-32GB GPU.
Figure 10: For ONI-retrieval and ONI-classification, sparse reward tasks favor larger in-
trinsic reward coefficient β while smaller values of β lead to better results for the dense reward
Score task. For ONI-ranking, we do not observe much difference for the Score task, but the
sparse reward tasks still slightly favors larger β.
Impact of Intrinsic Reward Coefficient β For ONI-classification and ONI-retrieval, we
have used different values of β for the Score task and other sparse reward tasks in Section 5.1.
Throughout our experiments, we have found that for these two methods, larger values of β lead to
better performance for the sparse reward tasks, while smaller values of β better balance between
intrinsic and extrinsic rewards for the dense reward Score task. In comparison, ONI-ranking
is relatively robust to this choice, where larger values of β are still slightly favored for the sparse
reward tasks.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
ONI-classification: the impact of the classification threshold As described in Section 3.2,
ONI-classification predicts binary rewards by modeling P (yt = 1|ot) and then thresholding
with η. Instead of using binary reward, an alternative design choice is to use real valued reward
rint(ot) = P (yt = 1|ot), (7)
where rint(ot) ∈ [0, 1] is the output of the reward classifier before thresholding. Figure 11 shows
that the performance of ONI-classification on the four NetHack tasks is relatively robust to
this hyperparameter η, and using P (yt = 1|ot) as the reward leads to similar performance. As
the training progresses, our reward model outputs values close to 0 or 17, and we hypothesize this
is the reason why the final performance remains comparable. Moreover, the natural classification
threshold η = 0.5 marginally outperforms the other values in the reward-free setting.
Figure 11: (Top) Performance of ONI-classification is robust to different choices of the clas-
sification threshold η on the four NetHack tasks. (Bottom) η = 0.5 marginally outperform the other
values for training intrinsic-reward-only agents. The result when using P (yt = 1|ot) as reward (7)
is marked with legend oni-classification (no eta).
ONI-ranking: the impact of sampling strategy for LLM annotation and reward training Un-
like ONI-classification that uses a LIFO queue to rank captions for LLM annotation, it is more
subtle to design the most effective sampling strategy for ONI-ranking, where we need to construct
pairs of captions to annotate and use for reward model training. Here we study the effect of dedu-
plicating captions before passing them to our pipeline. In either case, we maintain a message list L,
and sample pairs of captions c1, c2 ∼ Uniform(L × L) for annotation. The annotated message pairs
are stored in another list, which is sampled from uniformly when training the reward model. In the
first option, each time the agent encounters a message, we check if it is already stored in L and only
add it if not. This is similar to the approach used in ONI-classification. In the second option,
we simply add all captions encountered by the agent into L, regardless of whether they have already
been seen before. This approach is similar to that taken by the original Motif work, which does not
perform any deduplication of the offline dataset.
Figure 12 shows the performance and the number of captions stored in the replay buffer for both
schemes. We see that for the deduplicated variant, the number of captions does not grow past a
certain point (approximately 70k unique captions). For the non-deduplicated variant, the number of
captions keeps growing linearly over time. The deduplicated variant fails to learn, which highlights
the important effect which the annotation dataset can have. We hypothesize that the deduplicated
variant may undersample captions that occur frequently in the agent’s experience, for which it is im-
portant to reliably estimate reward. For example, the blank message occurs very frequently during
policy learning, but is only included in a small fraction of the pairs sent to the LLM for annotation,
7To increase the diversity of the captions in the training dataset, we do not requery the LLM server if a caption is already
annotated before. Therefore, every caption in our dataset only has a single label, resulting in this phenomenon.
Online Intrinsic Rewards for Decision Making Agents from Large Language Model Feedback
since it is sampled with the same probability as the other ∼ 70k other captions. In contrast, the
duplicated variant samples the blank message and other frequent captions with much higher proba-
bility. Still, this remains a simple strategy, and designing more sophisticated sampling mechanisms
(for example, that account for the epistemic uncertainty of the reward model) would be an interesting
direction for future work.
Figure 12: Performance and number of captions in the replay buffer for agents trained with and
without message deduplication. Keeping the natural distribution of captions, and not deduplicating,
is important to enable our ranking-based method to learn.
D Additional Related Work
LLM for RL Broadly Another way of leveraging the prior knowledge encoded in LLMs for
decision making is to use the LLM directly as a policy. This approach has been successfully used
in robotics (Ahn et al., 2022; Driess et al., 2023), as well as open-ended exploration in MineCraft
(Wang et al., 2024). Both settings require the LLM to operate at a higher level of abstraction, by
having it call upon a set of semantically grounded skills which handle the low-level sensorimotor
activity. These are in turn produced by imitation learning on expert trajectories or hardcoded APIs.
Jeurissen et al. (2024) prompt the LLM to choose a predefined skill to play NetHack. The prompts
are constructed to represent past events, current observation, and the task description and hardcoded
available skills are also included. More references on LLMs for decision making can be found in
the survey paper of Cao et al. (2024).