Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025 Cover Page
Towards Improving Reward Design in RL:
A Reward Alignment Metric for RL Practitioners
Calarina Muslimani, Kerrick Johnstonbaugh, Suyog Chandramouli,
Serena Booth, W. Bradley Knox, Matthew E. Taylor
Keywords: Reinforcement Learning, Reward Design, Alignment, Human-AI Interaction,
Human-in-the-loop
Summary
Reinforcement learning (RL) agents are fundamentally limited by the quality of the reward
functions they learn from, yet reward design is often overlooked under the assumption that
a well-defined reward is readily available. However, this is rarely the case in real-world ap-
plications, and reward design is a challenging endeavor: sparse rewards can hinder learning,
while dense rewards may increase the risk of misspecification. Reward evaluation is equally
problematic: how do we know if a reward function is correctly specified? In our work, we ad-
dress this challenge by focusing on reward alignment — assessing whether a reward function
accurately encodes the preferences of a human stakeholder. As a concrete measure of reward
alignment, we introduce the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient. This metric quantifies the sim-
ilarity between a human stakeholder’s ranking of trajectory distributions and those induced by
a given reward function. We validate the usefulness of this metric theoretically and through a
user study.
Contribution(s)
1. This paper introduces the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient, a metric to evaluate reward
alignment—the extent to which a reward function encodes the preferences of a human stake-
holder. This metric only requires access to human preferences over trajectory distributions.
Context: Prior work (Gleave et al., 2021; Wulfe et al., 2022) has proposed reward distance
metrics, which can be treated as reward alignment metrics if one of the reward functions
accurately reflects the preferences of a human stakeholder. Other work (Brown et al., 2021)
has proposed alignment verification of reward functions. However, these metrics assume
access to ground-truth reward or value functions which our metric does not require.
2. Through an 11–person user study, we demonstrate that the Trajectory Alignment Coeffi-
cient can assist RL practitioners (self-identified) with reward selection, compared to relying
solely on inspection of the reward function definition. Specifically, we found the following
statistically significant results: (1) access to the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient during
reward selection reduced perceived cognitive workload by 1.5x, (2) was preferred by 82%
of participants over the Reward Only condition, and (3) increased the success rate of select-
ing reward functions that produced performant policies by 41% (compared to unselected
alternative rewards).
Context: The user study results presented in this work are in the context of the Hungry-
Thirsty domain (Singh et al., 2009). This test-bed has been shown to be particularly chal-
lenging for reward design (Booth et al., 2023). Further, we specifically do not include
Gleave et al. (2021); Wulfe et al. (2022); Brown et al. (2021) as conditions in the user study
because they are not directly comparable due to the difference in necessary assumptions.
3. We prove that the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient is invariant to potential-based reward
shaping and positive linear transformations of the reward function if and only if the metric
considers trajectory distributions that share the same start state distribution.
Context: Invariance to these reward transformations is a common property of reward
evaluation metrics proposed in previous works (Gleave et al., 2021; Wulfe et al., 2022).
Towards Improving Reward Design in RL: A Reward Alignment Metric for RL Practitioners
Towards Improving Reward Design in RL:
A Reward Alignment Metric for RL Practitioners
Calarina Muslimani1, †, Kerrick Johnstonbaugh2, Suyog Chandramouli3,
Serena Booth4, 5, W. Bradley Knox6, Matthew E. Taylor1,7
†musliman@ualberta.ca
1University of Alberta
2RL Core Technologies
3Princeton University
4Brown University
5Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing
6University of Texas at Austin
7Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
Abstract
Reinforcement learning agents are fundamentally limited by the quality of the reward
functions they learn from, yet reward design is often overlooked under the assumption
that a well-defined reward is readily available. However, in practice, designing rewards
is difficult, and even when specified, evaluating their correctness is equally problematic:
how do we know if a reward function is correctly specified? In our work, we address
these challenges by focusing on reward alignment — assessing whether a reward func-
tion accurately encodes the preferences of a human stakeholder. As a concrete measure
of reward alignment, we introduce the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient to quantify
the similarity between a human stakeholder’s ranking of trajectory distributions and
those induced by a given reward function. We show that the Trajectory Alignment Co-
efficient exhibits desirable properties, such as not requiring access to a ground truth
reward, invariance to potential-based reward shaping, and applicability to online RL.
Additionally, in an 11–person user study of RL practitioners, we found that access to
the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient during reward selection led to statistically signifi-
cant improvements. Compared to relying only on reward functions, our metric reduced
cognitive workload by 1.5x, was preferred by 82% of users and increased the success
rate of selecting reward functions that produced performant policies by 41%.
1 Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), the reward hypothesis states that “all of what we mean by goals
and purposes can be well thought of as maximization of the expected value of the cumulative sum
of a received scalar signal (reward)” (Sutton & Barto, 2018). More generally, this means that RL
agents can solve a task provided the reward function properly defines the task’s objective. However,
the reward hypothesis does not address the practical challenges of designing reward functions. In
practice, reward design is often a difficult and error-prone process carried out by human engineers
(Skalse et al., 2022; Booth et al., 2023; Knox & MacGlashan, 2024).
These challenges can become more pronounced in real-world RL applications, where reward design
is typically a collaborative process between RL practitioner(s) and domain expert(s). While the
domain expert has specialized knowledge of the task, they typically lack RL expertise, making it
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
difficult for them to define a reward function explicitly. Instead, the domain expert might express
preferences, constraints, or desired outcomes, leaving the RL practitioner responsible for designing
(or selecting) a reward function that satisfies these preferences. This collaboration can increase the
complexity of crafting reward functions that correctly specify objectives.
Sparse reward functions are conceptually simple to understand and implement but are less com-
monly used in practice since current RL algorithms struggle to learn from infrequent signals (Pig-
natelli et al., 2024). To overcome this, dense reward functions are employed, which provide more
frequent feedback to help mitigate the credit assignment problem. However, reward misspecification
remains a challenge (Amodei et al., 2016; Skalse et al., 2022). For example, a recent survey found
that reward shaping, a method intended to facilitate learning, is commonly used in RL applications
for autonomous driving (Knox et al., 2023); without careful design, reward shaping can introduce
unintended biases. This can result in RL agents exploiting shortcuts in the reward function or failing
to achieve the “true” task objective (Pan et al., 2022). Such issues can pose serious safety risks in
real-world applications like autonomous driving and industrial process control.
Reward evaluation is also challenging. This is the process of assessing whether a reward function
accurately captures the intended task. A common approach is the “rollout” method, where a policy
is trained to optimize the reward function, and then its rollouts are examined to assess the learned
behavior (Booth et al., 2023; Gleave et al., 2021). However, this approach has several limitations:
(1) it is computationally expensive, (2) can result in reward overfitting—where reward functions be-
come unintentionally over-engineered for a specific algorithm or environment configuration—and
(3) assumes that policies are evaluated outside of training, making it less applicable to the online RL
setting. Alternatively, prior works (Gleave et al., 2021; Wulfe et al., 2022) have proposed distance
metrics for reward evaluation but these require a ground-truth reward for baseline comparison, lim-
iting their integration into the reward design pipeline (unless shaping a reward based on an existing
function). Moreover, other metrics (Knox & MacGlashan, 2024; Brown et al., 2021) focus solely on
alignment verification and do not measure partial alignment.
In this work, we focus on reward alignment as a means of reward evaluation, which we define as the
extent to which a reward function preserves human preferences. To operationalize this concept, we
introduce the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient (σTAC). This metric evaluates the similarity between
a human stakeholder’s preferences over trajectory distributions (of which trajectories are a special
case) and those induced by a given reward, discount factor pair. It overcomes key limitations of
previous work by eliminating the need for a ground-truth reward, instead relying on human prefer-
ences. Unlike alignment verification, the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient measures the degree of
reward alignment, allowing it to distinguish between reward functions that yield the same optimal
policy but rank intermediate trajectory distributions differently—making it suitable for online RL.
Additionally, we prove the necessary and sufficient conditions for the Trajectory Alignment Coeffi-
cient to be invariant to common transformations, in particular potential-based shaping and positive
linear rescaling. This invariance is important because sensitivity to these transformations can cause
functionally equivalent rewards to receive different scores, leading to unreliable assessments. Be-
yond reward alignment, the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient can serve as a distance metric for
comparing reward functions (and their associated discounting). While our primary focus is on re-
ward design with human preferences as the reference, this perspective highlights its potential as a
tool for comparing reward functions more broadly.
Lastly, we assess whether the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient can aid RL practitioners in the re-
ward design process (see Figure 1). Specifically, we investigate its benefit in reward selection—i.e.,
choosing performant reward functions that capture a domain expert’s preferences. To evaluate this,
we conducted an 11–person user study in the Hungry-Thirsty domain (Singh et al., 2009), a test-bed
where RL practitioners have struggled to design well-specified rewards (Booth et al., 2023). Our
statistically significant findings show that access to the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient during re-
ward selection (1) reduced perceived cognitive workload by 1.5x, (2) was preferred by 82% of users
over the Reward Only condition, and (3) increased the success rate of selecting reward functions that
Towards Improving Reward Design in RL: A Reward Alignment Metric for RL Practitioners
produced performant policies by 41%. Ultimately, our work takes a step toward improving reward
design and selection in RL by introducing a metric that measures the alignment between a proposed
reward function and a set of human preferences over sampled trajectory distributions.Trajectory
Alignment
Coefficient
( )
Reward
Function B
= 0.7
Reward
Function A
= 0.3
Domain Expert RL Practitioner Designs Reward Functions
Domain Knowledge
(Preferences)
Figure 1: This illustrates the interaction between a domain expert and an RL practitioner in real-
world applications (black arrow) and how our metric, σTAC, integrates into this process (blue arrow).
2 Related Work
Early alignment research focused on directly training agents to align with human preferences
(Hadfield-Menell et al., 2016). However, these approaches did not include an assessment of the
agent’s alignment. Recent efforts have shifted to evaluating the quality of engineered and learned
reward functions. For example, Booth et al. (2023); Knox et al. (2023) have conducted empirical
investigations to identify shortcomings in current reward design practices and evaluation schemes.
Furthermore, metrics have been proposed to compare reward functions without requiring policy
evaluations (see Table 1). While some methods are invariant to potential-based shaping, they can
rely on access to a ground-truth reward function (Wulfe et al., 2022; Gleave et al., 2021), which
is often impractical. Likewise, Brown et al. (2021) proposed verification methods to assess the
alignment of an RL agent’s behavior but define alignment in terms of optimal policies. We argue,
however, that defining alignment in this manner can be limiting, particularly in online RL where
one cares about the agent’s lifetime performance. Our work builds on Knox & MacGlashan (2024),
which described methods to identify misalignment and outlined its common causes. However, this
prior work focused on detecting whether misalignment exists, offering only a binary assessment. We
extend this framework by introducing a real-valued metric that quantifies the degree of alignment,
enabling a more nuanced evaluation of reward function quality. Lastly, while LLM alignment is also
a prominent topic (Shen et al., 2023), it is beyond the scope of this work due to its broad focus,
which can include mitigating adversarial attacks and detecting bias.
METRIC Invariant No GT r Not No Human Suitable for
Required Binary Preferences Online RL
GLEAVE ET AL. (2021) ✓ × ✓ (✓) ✓
WULFE ET AL. (2022) ✓ × ✓ (✓) ✓
BROWN ET AL. (2021) – × × (✓) ×
KNOX & MACGLASHAN (2024) ✓ ✓ × × ×
TRAJECTORY ALIGNMENT COEFFICIENT ✓ ✓ ✓ × ✓
Table 1: Comparison of reward evaluation measures. ✓ indicates the metric satisfies the property, ×
indicates it does not, (✓) indicates partial satisfaction, and – indicates the property was not evaluated.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
3 Background
This section first provides background on RL, then discusses how a reward function and discount
factor pair, (r, γ), induce preference orderings over trajectories (and trajectory distributions), a con-
cept rooted in prior work on policy preferences (Bowling et al., 2023).
Definition 1. A Markov decision process (MDP) is defined by the tuple (S, A, r, p, μ, γ), where
S is the state space, A is the action space, r : S × A × S → R is the reward function and
p : S × A × S → [0, 1] is the state transition function. The initial state distribution is given by μ,
and γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor that controls the weighting of future rewards.
In RL, at every time-step t, the agent takes an action at in state st, transitions to state st+1, and
then receives reward rt+1. A trajectory τ is a sequence of (st, at, st+1) tuples that either reaches a
terminal state after a finite number of steps or continues indefinitely. The return of a trajectory is
defined as the sum of discounted future rewards, Gr (τ ) = PT
t=0 γtrt+1, where T = |τ | − 1 for
episodic tasks or T → ∞ for continuing tasks. The agent attempts to learn a policy, π : S × A →
[0, 1] to maximize the expected return.
Reward Functions Induce Preference Orderings Consider the deterministic case where we de-
fine preferences over a set of trajectories that share the same start state. In this case, given (r, γ) a
preferred trajectory is one that yields a greater return:
τA ≿
(r,γ)
τB ⇐⇒ Gr (τA) ≥ Gr (τB) (3.1)
where τA ≻
(r,γ)
τB indicates that trajectory τA is preferred over τB with respect to (r, γ).
We now shift to the stochastic setting, which arises when the environment or the agent’s behavior
is stochastic. In this case, we consider probability distributions over trajectories. Note, we specifi-
cally focus on trajectory distributions rather than policies, as some distributions (e.g., those that are
generated from non-Markovian policies) cannot correspond to any Markov policy.
Definition 2. Let H(μ) be the set of all probability distributions over trajectories that share the
same initial state distribution μ. That is,
H(μ) = {η(τ ) | η(τ ) = μ(s0)P (a0, s1, a1, . . . | s0)} ,
where P (a0, s1, a1, . . . | s0) is an arbitrary conditional distribution over trajectories given the ini-
tial state s0. We refer to η(τ ) ∈ H(μ) as a trajectory distribution and omit the explicit dependence
on τ for brevity.
Definition 3. Given (r, γ), we define a preference ordering over trajectory distributions as follows:
ηA ≿
(r,γ)
ηB ⇐⇒ EτA∼ηA [Gr (τA)] ≥ EτB ∼ηB [Gr (τB )] (3.2)
Equations (3.1) and (3.2) imply that the (r, γ) pair naturally induce a preference ordering over trajec-
tories (or trajectory distributions) via the expected return. To illustrate these concepts, consider the
simple autonomous driving task (Knox & MacGlashan, 2024) in Figure 2. Suppose there exists only
three trajectories {τsuccess, τidle, τcrash}, and a trajectory distribution ηsuccess-crash. τsuccess consists of
safe driving. τcrash consists of a car crashing and τidle consists of a car remaining parked. ηsuccess-crash
is a trajectory distribution that places 90% of its probability mass on τsuccess and 10% on τcrash. Next,
consider the pair (r, γ) with return values: Gr (τsuccess) = 10, G(τidle) = 0, Gr (τcrash) = −50. By
the probabilities of ηsuccess-crash, Eτ ∼ηsuccess-crash [Gr (τ )] = 4. Based on equations (3.1) and (3.2), the
resulting preference ordering is τsuccess ≻ ηsuccess-crash ≻ τidle ≻ τcrash.
4 An Alignment Metric for Reward Function Evaluation
This section introduces the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient as a reward alignment metric and es-
tablishes its key theoretical properties.
Towards Improving Reward Design in RL: A Reward Alignment Metric for RL PractitionersReturn
Human
stakeholder
Mismatch in
preferences
Best
Worst
10
4
-50
90%
10%
Trajectory
Alignment
Coefficient:
Less than 1
0
Figure 2: This provides an example of the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient in the case of a simple
autonomous driving scenario.
4.1 Trajectory Alignment Coefficient
To establish a reward alignment metric, we need to quantify how well a reward function reflects the
preferences of a human stakeholder. To achieve this, we propose the Trajectory Alignment Coeffi-
cient, a measure based on Kendall’s Tau–b correlation. Kendall’s Tau–b is a non-parametric measure
that quantifies the level of agreement between two sets of ranked data, adjusting for ties (Kendall,
1945). It outputs a scalar value ∈ [−1, 1], indicating levels of agreement: 1 for perfect agreement
(e.g., identical preference orderings) and −1 for complete disagreement (e.g., reverse preference
orderings). The Trajectory Alignment Coefficient measures the similarity among preference order-
ings over trajectory distributions in H(μ). However, H(μ) can theoretically contain an intractably
large number of trajectory distributions. To apply the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient as a practical
reward alignment measure, we must consider finite subsets of trajectory distributions from H(μ).
To compute σTAC, we first construct two preference data sets, one from a human (Dh), assumed to
be transitive, and one induced by a given (r, γ) pair. Specifically, we define:
υh(Dh) =
n
{ηi, ηj } | (ηi ⋄
(h) ηj ) ∈ Dh
o
where ⋄ ∈ {≻, ≺, ∼} denotes a preference relation and the subscript indicates whether the pref-
erence originates from the human or (r, γ). υ extracts unordered pairs of trajectory distributions
that were ranked by the human. Then given these pairs, we construct the corresponding preference
dataset under (r, γ) via Definition (3), which ranks trajectory distributions with respect to (r, γ):
Dr,γ (υh, r, γ) =
n
(ηi ⋄
(r,γ) ηj ) | {ηi, ηj } ∈ υh(Dh)
o
.
Once we have both Dh and Dr,γ , σTAC measures their agreement using Kendall’s Tau-b:
σTAC(Dh, Dr,γ ) .
= P − Q
p(P + Q + X0)(P + Q + Y0) (4.1)
where
P : Number of concordant pairs between Dr,γ and Dh,
Q : Number of discordant pairs between Dr,γ and Dh,
X0 : Number of pairs tied only in Dr,γ ,
Y0 : Number of pairs tied only in Dh.
This formulation ensures that σTAC quantifies the alignment between human and reward-induced
preferences over the same set of trajectory distribution pairs. To illustrate, consider the trajectory
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
distributions, η1, η2, η3, where Dh, Dr,γ are as follows,
Dh =
n
(η2 ≻
(h)
η3), (η1 ≻
(h)
η3)
o
=⇒ υh(Dh) =
n
{η2, η3}, {η1, η3}
o
Dr,γ (υh, r, γ) =
n
(η2 ≺
(r,γ)
η3), (η1 ≻
(r,γ)
η3)
o
.
Note that given a subset of trajectory distributions, the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient can be ap-
plied in cases with either a full or partial ranking. A full ranking establishes a complete order over
the elements in a subset, where all necessary pairwise comparisons are available. In contrast, a par-
tial ranking occurs when some pairwise comparisons are missing (e.g., Dr,γ , Dh, as the comparison
between η1 and η2 is missing). This flexibility allows the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient to be
used in settings where ranking information is limited or incomplete.
Moreover, the definition for σTAC in Equation (4.1) can also be used to evaluate the differences
between any two reward, discount factor pairs: (r, γ), (r′, γ). For example, given data sets Dr,γ and
Dr′,γ representing preferences over trajectory distributions, we can use Equation (4.1) to determine
how similar the preferences induced by (r, γ) are to those induced by (r′, γ).
4.2 Invariance to Common Reward Transformations
Reward shaping is commonly used to accelerate RL training by modifying the reward function to im-
prove learning efficiency (Ng et al., 1999). Common reward transformations include potential-based
reward shaping and positive linear rescaling. A well-designed reward evaluation metric should be in-
variant to these transformations; otherwise, it may assign different scores to functionally equivalent
rewards, leading to inconsistent assessments. We show that the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient
maintains this invariance, ensuring stable evaluations of reward alignment.
Definition 4. A potential-based reward function is defined as r′(s, a, s′) .
= r(s, a, s′) + γΦ(s′) −
Φ(s), given a potential function Φ : S → R, and γ as the MDP discount factor.
To determine whether the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient is invariant to potential-based reward
shaping, we first examine the conditions for which preference orderings remain unchanged. While
potential-based reward shaping is known to preserve the optimal policy (Ng et al., 1999), we further
prove in Theorem 4.4 that, in the infinite-horizon setting, it preserves preference orderings over
all trajectory distributions η ∈ H(μ) if and only if they share the same start-state distribution, μ.
This establishes a fundamental condition for ensuring that any reward alignment metric based on
preference orderings remains unaffected by potential-based reward shaping.
Lemma 4.1. Given the infinite-horizon setting, if the expected returns under reward function r′ are
a positive linear transformation of the expected returns under reward function r, with respect to all
trajectory distributions, then the preference ordering over any two trajectory distributions ηi and ηj
remains unchanged. Formally:
Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )] = αEτ ∼η [Gr (τ )] + β =⇒

ηi ≿
(r,γ)
ηj ⇐⇒ ηi ≿
(r′,γ)
ηj

∀ηi, ηj ,
where α > 0 and β are constants and the expectations Eτ ∼η [Gr (τ )] and Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )] are taken
over the same trajectory distributions.
Lemma 4.2. [Sufficiency] In the infinite horizon setting, if two trajectory distributions ηi, ηj ∈
H(μ), then potential-based reward shaping preserves their preference ordering with respect to the
reward function, r, and the potential-based function, r′:
ηi ≿
(r,γ)
ηj ⇐⇒ ηi ≿
(r′,γ)
ηj .
Proof. Let ηi, ηj ∈ H(μ) be arbitrary trajectory distributions, and without loss of generality assume
that ηi ≿
(r,γ)
ηj . From Definition (3), this implies that Eτ ∼ηi [Gr (τ )] ≥ Eτ ∼ηj [Gr (τ )]. We now
Towards Improving Reward Design in RL: A Reward Alignment Metric for RL Practitioners
analyze how the expected return changes under the potential-based reward function r′. The expected
return under the reward function r and the shaped reward function r′ is:
Eτ ∼η [Gr (τ )] = Eτ ∼η
" ∞X
t=0
γtr(st, at, st+1)
#
, (4.2)
Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )] = Eτ ∼η
" ∞X
t=0
γtr′(st, at, st+1)
#
(4.3)
Substitute the definition of the potential-based reward function, Definition (4), into Equation (4.3):
Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )] = Eτ ∼η
" ∞X
t=0
γt
r(st, at, st+1) + γΦ(st+1) − Φ(st)
#
Distribute γt and rearrange terms:
Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )] = Eτ ∼η
" ∞X
t=0
γtr(st, at, st+1) + γtγΦ(st+1) − γtΦ(st)
#
= Eτ ∼η
" ∞X
t=0
γtr(st, at, st+1)
#
+ Eτ ∼η
" ∞X
t=0
γt+1Φ(st+1) − γtΦ(st)
#
= Eτ ∼η [Gr (τ )] + Eτ ∼η
" ∞X
t=1
γtΦ(st) −
∞X
t=0
γtΦ(st)
#
Split P∞
t=0 γtΦ(st) into two parts, one from t = 1 to ∞ and the other isolating t = 0:
Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )] = Eτ ∼η [Gr (τ )] + Eτ ∼η
" ∞X
t=1
γtΦ(st) −
∞X
t=1
γtΦ(st) − γ0Φ(s0)
#
Now, combine like-terms and P∞
t=1 γtΦ(st) gets canceled out:
Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )] = Eτ ∼η [Gr (τ )] − Eτ ∼η [Φ(s0)]
As Φ(s0) depends only on the start-state distribution μ, and μ is the same for all η ∈ H(μ), we
conclude that the expected returns under r and r′ differ by a constant, Es0∼μ [Φ(s0)]:
Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )] = Eτ ∼η [Gr (τ )] − Es0∼μ [Φ(s0)] (4.4)
As Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )] is a positive linear transformation of Eτ ∼η [Gr (τ )], we apply Lemma 4.1 and
conclude that the preference remains unchanged under reward shaping:
ηi ≿
(r,γ)
ηj ⇐⇒ ηi ≿
(r′,γ)
ηj ∀ηi, ηj ∈ H(μ)
Lemma 4.3. [Necessity] In the infinite horizon setting, if two trajectory distributions ηi ∈ H(μi)
and ηj ∈ H(μj ) have different start-state distributions (μi̸ = μj ), then there exists a potential
function Φ such that:
ηi ≿
(r,γ)
ηj and ηi ≺
(r′,γ)
ηj .
We leave the proof for the necessity condition (Lemma (4.3) to Supplementary Material C.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
Theorem 4.4. In the infinite-horizon setting, let (r, γ) and two trajectory distributions ηi ∈ H(μi)
and ηj ∈ H(μj ) be given. Potential-based reward shaping is guaranteed to maintain the preference
ordering over all trajectory distributions if and only if μi = μj . Formally,
ηi ≿
(r,γ)
ηj ⇐⇒ ηi ≿
(r′,γ)
ηj
 ∀Φ ∈ F ⇐⇒ μi = μj
where F is the space of all potential-based shaping functions and Φ : S 7 → R is an arbitrary function
in this space. The proof of Theorem (4.4) follows directly from Lemmas (4.2) and (4.3).
Definition 5. Let Dr,γ , Dr′,γ , and Dh be preference data sets over trajectory distributions induced
by (r, γ), (r′, γ), and a human, respectively, where r′ .
= f (r) for some transformation f . The Trajec-
tory Alignment Coefficient σTAC is invariant to f if and only if σTAC(Dh, Dr,γ ) = σTAC(Dh, Dr′,γ ).
Theorem 4.5. Consider the infinite-horizon setting. Let r and r′ be reward functions where r′ is a
shaped version of r using potential-based reward shaping. Let Dh be a data set of human prefer-
ences over trajectory distributions, and define Dr,γ = Dr,γ (υh, r, γ) and Dr′,γ = Dr′,γ (υh, r′, γ)
as the preference data sets induced by (r, γ) and (r′, γ), respectively. The Trajectory Alignment Co-
efficient is invariant to any potential-based reward shaping if and only if within each set of trajectory
distributions {ηi, ηj } ∈ υh(Dh), ηi, ηj share the same initial state distribution (i.e., ηi, ηj ∈ H(μ)).
Proof. Let {ηi, ηj } ∈ υh(Dh) be an arbitrary pair of trajectory distributions compared in the human
preference data set. By Definition (4.1) of σTAC, the following biconditional holds:
σTAC(Dh, Dr,γ ) = σTAC(Dh, Dr′,γ ) ⇐⇒ ∀{ηi, ηj } ∈ υh(Dh) : ηi ⋄
(r,γ) ηj ⇐⇒ ηi ⋄
(r′,γ) ηj

where ⋄ ∈ {≻, ≺, ∼} denotes the preference relation. By Theorem (4.4), we have:
ηi ⋄
(r,γ) ηj ⇐⇒ ηi ⋄
(r′,γ) ηj
 ∀Φ ∈ F, ηi ∈ H(μi), ηj ∈ H(μj ) ⇐⇒ μi = μj
Therefore, we conclude that σTAC is invariant to potential-based reward shaping if and only if all sets
of trajectory distributions being compared share the same initial state distribution, μ:
σTAC(Dh, r, γ) = σTAC(Dh, r′, γ) ∀Φ ∈ F ⇐⇒ ηi, ηj ∈ H(μ), ∀{ηi, ηj } ∈ υh(Dh)
Theorem 4.6. Given the infinite-horizon setting, the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient is invariant
to positive linear transformations.
To prove Theorem (4.6), we show that a positive linear transformation linearly transforms the ex-
pected return. We can then apply Lemma (4.1) and the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient’s invariance
definition (5) to complete the proof. The full derivation is provided in Supplementary Material C.
4.3 Trajectory Alignment Coefficient in Practice
To use the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient in practice, two parameters must be specified: the
number of trajectories (or trajectory distributions) to rank and the trajectory sampling method. To
obtain a meaningful evaluation, it is important to include a diverse set of trajectories. If trajectories
are limited to a specific region of the state and action space, the evaluation may fail to reveal reward
misalignment in other regions. To mitigate this, one heuristic we propose is to sample trajectories
that exhibit qualitatively different behaviors. In our experiments, we generate these trajectories via
RL agents partially trained with different reward functions. However, other sources, such as human
demonstrations or trajectories generated through behavioral cloning, could also be used. Beyond
diversity, the number of ranked trajectories plays a critical role. While more trajectories provide a
clearer picture of reward alignment, ranking too many is impractical for humans. We found that in
Towards Improving Reward Design in RL: A Reward Alignment Metric for RL Practitioners
our tested domain (Hungry-Thirsty, described in Section 5), the Trajectory Alignment Coefficients
from a subset of 12 trajectories were highly correlated with those from a set of 1200, suggesting that
a smaller, well-chosen set can still provide reliable estimates. See Supplementary Material A.2 for
further details.
To illustrate the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient in practice, we revisit the toy example in Figure
2, demonstrating how reward-based rankings can diverge from human preferences Specifically, the
toy (r, γ) pair produced a preference ordering of τsuccess ≻ ηsuccess-crash ≻ τidle ≻ τcrash. However, a
human stakeholder would likely prefer remaining parked over possibly crashing: τsuccess ≻ τidle ≻
ηsuccess-crash ≻ τcrash. To compute σTAC from Equation (4.1), we count the number of concordant
and discordant pairs. In our four-element example, six pairwise comparisons are possible, with all
but one being concordant. The only discordant pair is (ηsuccess-crash, τidle), where the preference is re-
versed. Since there are no ties, X0 and Y0 are zero. Substituting these values into the equation yields
σTAC ≈ 0.67, indicating misalignment between (r, γ) and the human stakeholder’s preferences.
5 Experimental Design
This study examines the reward design setting where RL practitioners have to choose between re-
ward functions in order to satisfy the preferences of another stakeholder (e.g., a domain expert).
In particular, our goal is to investigate whether the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient can assist RL
practitioners in reward selection. We assess this by comparing RL practitioners with and without
access to our metric, focusing on two key dimensions:
1. Perceived Benefit — Does it reduce perceived cognitive workload, increase ease of use, and
improve understanding of reward functions?
2. Practical Impact — Does access to the metric help RL practitioners choose reward functions that
improve performance of learned policies while also reducing the time spent on reward selection?
We conducted an ethics-approved human subject study with 11 self-identified RL practitioners. This
included individuals who had completed graduate courses in RL (81%), conducted RL research
(100%), or applied RL in their professional work (27%). Note these categories were not mutually
exclusive. In this within-subjects study, participants selected reward functions under three experi-
mental conditions with different types of assistance. The study was primarily in-person and each
session lasted approximately 90 minutes.
Testbed: Hungry-Thirsty Our study is conducted in a modified Hungry-Thirsty domain (Singh
et al., 2009), an environment where others have shown (Booth et al., 2023) that RL practitioners
struggle with reward design. It is a 4 × 4 grid-world where food and water are randomly placed at
the grid corners (see Figure 12 in Supplementary Material D). The agent can move in one of the
four cardinal directions or execute eat or drink actions. The agent’s goal is to maximize time spent
without hunger. Hunger occurs if the agent has not eaten in the previous timestep, but eating is only
possible at a food source when the agent is not thirsty. If the agent is thirsty, the eat action fails.
The agent becomes thirsty with 0.10 probability per step. This is an infinite-horizon MDP, although
each episode is truncated after 200 timesteps. The state space consists of the agent’s position and
two Boolean variables for hunger and thirst. The reward function is a linear combination of these
variables. The evaluation metric is the number of timesteps the agent is not hungry.
Study Protocol The study consisted of two primary components, Preference Review and Re-
ward Selection. In the Preference Review component, participants first read a description of the
Hungry-Thirsty domain and then completed a short quiz and an interactive game-play session
to confirm their understanding of its rules. They were informed that they would be collabo-
rating with a domain expert to select a reward function for training an RL agent, with the ex-
pert providing a ranking of 12 trajectories (generated using the task evaluation metric as a proxy
for expert preferences). Participants then reviewed this ranking alongside corresponding video
clips. To obtain these trajectories, we use the mixture sampling method described in Section 4.3.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025Domain Expert’s
Rankings
Reward Function
Rankings
Traj. A
Traj. B
Traj. C
Traj. B
Traj. A
Traj. C
Figure 3: Visualization comparing rank-
ings of 3 trajectories, used in the Reward
+ Alignment + Visualization condition.
In the Reward Selection phase, participants completed
four rounds of reward selection, with the goal of choos-
ing the reward function that best reflects the domain ex-
pert’s preferences. To select reward functions for this
component, we considered those from the open-sourced
human reward data set in Booth et al. (2023) and their
affine transformations. See Table 4 in Supplementary
Material B for the complete set of reward function com-
parisons. When selecting reward functions for com-
parisons, we focused on reward functions that: (1) dif-
fered in magnitude, scale, or range, and (2) myopically
ranked states based on immediate reward. Across all conditions, participants had access to two re-
ward functions at a time and could revisit the trajectory rankings along with their respective video
clips. Moreover, reward function pairs were randomized and were not repeated across the study.
See Figures 6–9 in Supplementary Material B for the user interface. The study contained three
conditions, whose order was randomized for each participant:
• Reward Only (Control): The reward functions were shown but no further information was given.
• Reward + Alignment: Participants also received the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient, computed
from the domain expert’s preferences and those induced by each reward function.
• Reward + Alignment + Visual: Participants were also provided the Trajectory Alignment Co-
efficient and a parallel coordinate plot illustrating differences in the domain expert’s and reward
functions’ rankings over trajectories (see example in Figure 3).
Evaluation To assess differences in perceived benefit across conditions, participants completed a
modified NASA Task Load Index (NASA-TLX) (Hart & Staveland, 1988), which measured cog-
nitive work load (scale from 1–7). The survey included all six NASA-TLX questions, along with
three additional questions on confidence in reward selection, helpfulness of feedback (e.g., align-
ment, visual, and/or reward function), and ease of integrating feedback into decisions (see Figure
10 in Supplementary Material B). Participants completed this survey after each condition. We then
compute the overall workload based on the survey responses. After completing all reward selection
conditions, participants voted on which condition best improved their understanding of the reward
function, provided the most useful feedback, was least mentally demanding, and made reward selec-
tion the easiest (see Figure 11 in Supplementary Material B). We also included open-ended questions
for participants to describe their experiences during the reward selection process.
To assess the practical impact of the conditions, we first examined how often users selected re-
ward functions that improved policy performance compared to the unselected alternative rewards.
For shorthand, we refer to these reward functions as performant or policy-improving. Specifically,
we calculated the proportion of times users chose the reward function that resulted in a higher fi-
nal return and a greater area under the learning curve (AUC), with respect to the evaluation met-
ric. To evaluate the policy performance of the reward functions, we trained Q–Learning, SARSA,
and Expected SARSA agents on each reward function, performing a grid search over learning rate
∈ {10−k, 5 × 10−k | k ∈ {2, 3, 4}}, and epsilon ∈ {0.01, 0.05, 0.15}. Each agent was trained
across 10 environment seeds. We then averaged final returns and AUC, separately, across all trained
agents to assess performance. By using multiple RL algorithms and varying hyperparameters, we
aimed to reduce the likelihood that a reward function’s performance was due to random chance or a
particularly favorable choice of hyperparameters. Second, we measured the time taken to complete
the reward selection process.
For all analyses, we used paired t–tests for continuous data when normality assumptions held and
Wilcoxon Signed-Rank tests otherwise. For categorical voting data, Fisher’s Exact Test was applied.
Towards Improving Reward Design in RL: A Reward Alignment Metric for RL Practitioners
The corresponding p–values and test statistics are reported: t (paired t–test) and W (Wilcoxon
Signed-Rank test). We performed the Bonferroni correction (α = 0.05) to control for Type I errors.
6 Results
This section presents the results from the user study, structured around our two research components,
perceived benefit and practical impact, as well as a qualitative analysis of participants’ experiences.
Perceived Benefit Figure 4(a) presents the results of the NASA-TLX survey: the average ratings
(± standard error) for five selected questions and the overall workload score. We chose a subset of
questions for this plot to avoid redundancy. We found that the overall workload score was signifi-
cantly lower for the Reward + Alignment (μ = 1.97, p = 0.003, t = −3.46) and Reward + Align-
ment + Visual (μ = 1.83, p = 0.02, W = 10.0) conditions compared to the Reward Only condition
(μ = 3.19), representing a 1.5x reduction in workload. Similarly, 4(b) shows the total number of
participant votes for each condition, reflecting preferences across different criteria. Notably, 100%
of participants reported that either alignment conditions led to easier decision-making. Additionally,
91% indicated that either alignment conditions improved their understanding of the reward functions
and reduced mental demand, while 82% found the provided information most useful—all of which
are significantly greater than the number of votes for the Reward Only condition (p ≤ 0.009).
Practical Impact In Figure 5(b), we found that participants achieved significantly greater success
in selecting the policy-improving reward functions in both the Reward + Alignment (μ = 0.93,
p = 0.01, W = 41.0) and Reward + Alignment + Visual (μ = 0.96, p = 0.008, W = 28.0)
conditions compared to the Reward Only condition (μ = 0.66). Specifically, we found that in the
Reward Only condition, 55% of participants selected policy-improving reward functions no better
than random (or worse). However, the time-to-completion data, shown in Figure 5(a), provide a
more complete picture. While participants on average took longer in the Reward Only condition
(μ = 660.89) compared to both the Reward + Alignment (μ = 334.09, p = 0.04, W = 13.0) and
Reward + Alignment + Visual conditions (μ = 393.44, p = 0.07, W = 16.0), these differences
were not statistical significant. It is important to acknowledge that deriving the preference ordering
used in the alignment conditions itself requires time, which is not accounted for in this comparison.
Beyond aggregate trends, individual differences in time use revealed interesting patterns. Notably,
six participants (P6–P11) spent more time in the Reward Only condition but still performed worse
in reward selection, highlighting that more time without alignment support did not lead to better
outcomes. Moreover, three participants (P1–P3) achieved perfect success rates in the Reward Only
condition while spending less time than in the Reward + Alignment + Visual condition. This sug-
gests that they may have required less assistance during reward selection, and the additional visual
feedback in the Reward + Alignment + Visual condition likely introduced more information for them
to process, increasing deliberation time. These results suggest that while alignment-based feedback
improved reward selection success for most participants, some succeeded without it.
Qualitative Analysis In the open-ended questions, we asked participants to explain which condi-
tion they liked and disliked. Most participants favored the Reward + Alignment + Visual condition
(73%). A common theme among these participants was the emphasis on how the combination of the
visualization and alignment score provided both intuitive insights into the reward function’s behavior
and a scalar metric that simplified decision-making. For example, P5 stated “It also let me see ex-
actly which trajectories were aligned vs not, giving me better insights into what behavior the reward
function was favoring.” Furthermore, the Reward Only condition was least favored by 64% of par-
ticipants. Two main complaints emerged: (1) difficulty interpreting the reward functions, requiring
intuition or domain expertise, and (2) the process being slow and tedious, making reward compar-
isons time-consuming. Specifically, P2 wrote “it is very hard to just look at the reward function and
guess what will happen,” while P8 mentioned “Even though all the information needed to make a
decision could be deducted from the trajectories, going through all of them on a piece of paper could
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025Lower is better Higher is better
(a) (b)
Figure 4: Results from participants’ experience during reward selection are shown from (a) partici-
pants given the NASA-TLX survey and (b) a survey assessing different aspects of favorability.Higher is better
(a) (b)
Lower is better
Figure 5: Results showing (a) the mean completion time (± standard error) for reward selection and
(b) the proportion of policy-improving reward functions selected per user and condition.
be very hard and time-consuming.” Lastly, two participants least preferred the Alignment + Reward
condition. The common theme was that the alignment score alone was insufficient. Unsurprisingly,
participants felt that, compared to the Reward + Alignment + Visual condition, it lacked detailed
feedback and appeared too aggregated without supporting visuals, making decision-making more
difficult. Overall, the open-ended responses further supported the quantitative evidence, indicating
that the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient improved the user experience during reward selection.
7 Conclusion
The success of RL agents is inherently dependent on the quality of the MDP’s reward function, yet
reward design is often treated as a secondary concern. In practice, however, it is a complex and
error-prone process. These challenges are further amplified in real-world RL applications, where
reward design is typically a collaborative effort between RL practitioners and domain experts. In
such settings, the RL practitioner must design a reward function that accurately reflects the domain
expert’s preferences and constraints. In this work, we address this challenge by introducing the
Trajectory Alignment Coefficient, a reward alignment metric that quantifies the similarity between
a human stakeholder’s preference orderings over trajectory distributions and those induced by a
reward function. Through an 11–person user study, we demonstrate its effectiveness in supporting
RL practitioners during reward selection. Specifically, participants in Trajectory Alignment-based
conditions reported significantly lower cognitive workload and were more likely to select policy-
improving reward functions. In future work, we plan to extend our metric to full reward design,
where participants construct reward functions from scratch.
Towards Improving Reward Design in RL: A Reward Alignment Metric for RL Practitioners
Broader Impact Statement
In this work, we introduce a reward evaluation metric that measures the alignment between a hu-
man stakeholder’s preferences over trajectory distributions and those induced by a reward function.
However, if the preferences provided by the human stakeholder do not accurately reflect their true
beliefs, the output of the metric may be unreliable and could mislead the reward design process.
Acknowledgments
This work has taken place in part in the Intelligent Robot Learning Lab at the University of Al-
berta and the Rewarding Lab at the University of Texas at Austin. The Intelligent Robot Learning
Lab is supported by research grants from Alberta Innovates; the Alberta Machine Intelligence In-
stitute (Amii); a Canada CIFAR AI Chair, Amii; the Digital Research Alliance of Canada; Mitacs;
and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC). The Rewarding Lab is sup-
ported by the National Science Foundation (NSF IIS-2402650), the Office of Naval Research (ONR
N00014-22-1-2204), EA Ventures, Bosch, UT Austin’s Good Systems grand challenge, and Open
Philanthropy.
References
Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané. Con-
crete Problems in AI Safety. CoRR, abs/1606.06565, 2016.
Serena Booth, W. Bradley Knox, Julie Shah, Scott Niekum, Peter Stone, and Alessandro Allievi.
The Perils of Trial-and-Error Reward Design: Misdesign through Overfitting and Invalid Task
Specifications. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2023.
Michael Bowling, John D. Martin, David Abel, and Will Dabney. Settling the Reward Hypothesis.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.
Daniel S. Brown, Jordan Schneider, and Scott Niekum. Value Alignment Verification. In Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Adam Gleave, Michael Dennis, Shane Legg, Stuart Russell, and Jan Leike. Quantifying Differences
in Reward Functions. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Dylan Hadfield-Menell, Stuart J Russell, Pieter Abbeel, and Anca Dragan. Cooperative Inverse
Reinforcement Learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016.
Sandra G. Hart and Lowell E. Staveland. Development of NASA-TLX (Task Load Index): Results
of Empirical and Theoretical Research. Advances in Psychology, 52:139–183, 1988.
Maurice George Kendall. The Treatment of Ties in Ranking Problems. Biometrika, 33:239–251,
1945.
W. Bradley Knox and James MacGlashan. How to Specify Reinforcement Learning Objectives. In
Finding the Frame: An RLC Workshop for Examining Conceptual Frameworks at the Reinforce-
ment Learning Conference, 2024.
W. Bradley Knox, Alessandro Allievi, Holger Banzhaf, Felix Schmitt, and Peter Stone. Reward
(Mis)design for Autonomous Driving. Artificial Intelligence, 316(103829), 2023.
Andrew Y. Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart J. Russell. Policy Invariance Under Reward Transfor-
mations: Theory and Application to Reward Shaping. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, 1999.
Alexander Pan, Kush Bhatia, and Jacob Steinhardt. The Effects of Reward Misspecification: Map-
ping and Mitigating Misaligned Models. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, 2022.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
Eduardo Pignatelli, Johan Ferret, Matthieu Geist, Thomas Mesnard, Hado van Hasselt, Olivier
Pietquin, and Laura Toni. A Survey of Temporal Credit Assignment in Deep Reinforcement
Learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024.
Tianhao Shen, Renren Jin, Yufei Huang, Chuang Liu, Weilong Dong, Zishan Guo, Xinwei Wu, Yan
Liu, and Deyi Xiong. Large Language Model Alignment: A Survey. CoRR, abs/2309.15025,
2023.
Satinder Singh, Richard L Lewis, and Andrew G Barto. Where Do Rewards Come From? In
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 2009.
Joar Skalse, Nikolaus Howe, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, and David Krueger. Defining and Character-
izing Reward Gaming. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An Introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Blake Wulfe, Ashwin Balakrishna, Logan Ellis, Jean Mercat, Rowan McAllister, and Adrien
Gaidon. Dynamics-Aware Comparison of Learned Reward Functions. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Towards Improving Reward Design in RL: A Reward Alignment Metric for RL Practitioners
Supplementary Materials
The following content was not necessarily subject to peer review.
A Trajectory Alignment Coefficient in Practice
A.1 How to sample trajectories?
To sample the trajectories used for the trajectory alignment coefficient, we propose that practitioners
select qualitatively different trajectories. We now outline the methodology used to obtain these
trajectories.
To ensure qualitative diversity, we sampled trajectories from Q–learning agents that were only par-
tially trained. Note that for this component, we only considered the environment configuration with
a fixed start state of (0, 0) and where the food and water locations are (3, 0) and (0, 0), respec-
tively. We did this intentionally, as the trajectory alignment coefficient only remains invariant to
potential-based reward shaping if the start state is fixed.
We used the default hyperparameters from Table 3 and the evaluation metric as the reward function
for this training. We categorized partial training into three groups: low-return, medium-return,
and high-return. After partial training, we performed offline evaluation (i.e., policy rollouts with
no exploration). The low-return group contained trajectories with returns in [1, 30), the medium-
return group had returns in [30, 60), and the high-return group had returns ≥ 60. We then randomly
sampled four trajectories per group, resulting in a total of 12 trajectories used in the user study
outlined in Section 5.
The specific returns (per the evaluation metric) of the 12 trajectories are as follows:
[1.0, 6.0, 9.0, 29.0, 43.0, 56.0, 56.0, 66.0, 68.0, 74.0, 90.0]
Note that the optimal policy achieves an average return of ≈ 96.31. We computed the optimal policy
by performing value iteration over 13 seeds.
A.2 How many trajectories to samples?
In Section 4.3, we noted that in Hungry Thirsty, the Trajectory Alignment Coefficients computed
from a small subset of 12 trajectories were highly correlated with those computed from a larger set
of 1200 trajectories. To better understand this relationship, we now outline the methodology used to
obtain this result.
More specifically, we used all 31 reward functions from the open-sourced human reward data set
from Booth et al. (2023), along with their variants (e.g., 23 added reward functions, linear transfor-
mations), resulting in a total of 54 reward functions. We then sampled trajectory subsets of varying
sizes (N ∈ {10, 12, 25, 100, 500}) using the sampling strategy described earlier. Using the task
evaluation metric as a proxy for the domain expert preferences, we calculated the Trajectory Align-
ment Coefficients (σT AC ) between the domain expert’s preferences and those induced by the reward
functions. To assess whether smaller trajectory subsets provide reliable σT AC estimates, we com-
puted the correlation between the σT AC scores from each subset to those obtained using a larger
trajectory set of 1200. We repeated this process 50 times per trajectory subset size to account for
variability and then averaged the resulting correlations. This is depicted in Table 2.
A high correlation between the Trajectory Alignment Coefficients from smaller subsets and the
1200–trajectory set would indicate that even with a limited number of trajectories, we can obtain
σT AC estimates that are consistent with those derived from a significantly larger sample. This
finding suggests that in Hungry-Thirsty, a relatively small number of trajectories may be sufficient
for accurately assessing σT AC , reducing the need for extensive trajectory ranking.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
We used Kendall’s Tau to measure correlation because (1) the normality assumption was violated,
making Pearson’s r unsuitable, and (2) there were ties in the dataset, which makes Kendall’s Tau a
better choice than Spearman’s Rho, as it handles tied ranks more effectively.
SUBSET SIZE AVERAGE CORRELATION STANDARD DEVIATION
500 0.992 0.005
100 0.979 0.009
25 0.930 0.036
12 0.828 0.105
10 0.795 0.131
Table 2: Average correlation (across 50 samples) between the σT AC scores computed from each
subset size and those obtained using a larger trajectory set of 1200 (denoted in bold). The standard
deviation across samples is reported in the third column.
A.3 Q-Learning Hyperparameters
An overview of the hyperparameters used for training the Q–Learning, SARSA, and Expected
SARSA algorithms are provided in Table 3. To evaluate the performance of the reward functions
used in the reward selection aspect of the user study, we trained 18 Q–Learning, SARSA and Ex-
pected SARSA agents by performing a full grid search over two hyperparameters: learning rate
and epsilon. We systematically varied both across all combinations while keeping the remaining
hyperparameters fixed.
HYPERPARAMETER VALUE
NUMBER OF TRAINING EPISODES 10000
NUMBER OF SEEDS 10
LEARNING RATE [0.0001, 0.001, 0.01, 0.0005, 0.005, 0.05]
EXPLORATION STRATEGY EPSILON-GREEDY
EPSILON [0.05, 0.10,0.15]
DISCOUNT 0.99
Table 3: Hyperparameters for all RL Algorithms. For hyperparameters with multiple options, the
list represents possible values that were searched over. Bolded values indicate default settings.
B User Study and Reproducibility
B.1 Code
We open-source our code and the corresponding data from the human subject study at the following
link: https://github.com/cmuslima/TAC_RewardAlignment_RLC2025.
B.2 User Study Figures
We first show figures that correspond to the interface used in the human-subject study.
Towards Improving Reward Design in RL: A Reward Alignment Metric for RL Practitioners# import notebooks; do not edit
import user_study_interface_backend_domain_expert
#researcher change the seed
interface = user_study_interface_backend_domain_expert.interface_backend(ran
# run this cell and enter your name.
interface.set_study_id()In [ ]:In [ ]:
2/12/25, 3:17 PM user_study_notebook_version2
file:///Users/cmuslimani/Projects/RewardDesign/Reward_Alignment/Experiments/user_study_notebook_version2.html 1/5
(a) First page.# This cell shows the agent acting in a sped up version of the domain
from IPython.display import Image
Image("User_Study_Data/TrajsGifs/same_start_state/demo_gif.gif", width=450)
# run this cell
interface.allow_user_control()
#run this cell
interface.env_understanding_checkin()In [ ]:In [ ]:In [ ]:
2/12/25, 3:17 PM user_study_notebook_version2
file:///Users/cmuslimani/Projects/RewardDesign/Reward_Alignment/Experiments/user_study_notebook_version2.html 2/5 (b) Second page.
Figure 6: First and second pages of the UI in the human-subject study.2/12/25, 3:17 PM user_study_notebook_version2
file:///Users/cmuslimani/Projects/RewardDesign/Reward_Alignment/Experiments/user_study_notebook_version2.html 3/5
(a) Third page.## run this cell to begin task 1
interface.studypart1()
hungry and thirsty
hungry and not thirsty
not hungry and thirsty
not hungry and not thirsty
hungry and thirsty
hungry and not thirsty
not hungry and thirsty
not hungry and not thirstyIn [ ]:
2/12/25, 3:17 PM user_study_notebook_version2
file:///Users/cmuslimani/Projects/RewardDesign/Reward_Alignment/Experiments/user_study_notebook_version2.html 4/5 (b) Fourth page.
Figure 7: Third and fourth pages of the UI in the human-subject study.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025# run this cell
interface.function_loop()
# run this cell
interface.condition_survey()
### # run this cell
interface.function_loop()
# run this cell
interface.condition_survey()
# run this cell
interface.function_loop()
# run this cell
interface.condition_survey()
# run this cell
interface.print_condition_summary()
# run this cell
interface.final_survey()
interface.data_to_saveIn [ ]:In [ ]:In [ ]:In [ ]:In [ ]:In [ ]:In [ ]:In [ ]:In [ ]:In [ ]:
2/12/25, 3:17 PM user_study_notebook_version2
file:///Users/cmuslimani/Projects/RewardDesign/Reward_Alignment/Experiments/user_study_notebook_version2.html 5/5
Figure 8: Fifth page of the UI in the human-subject study.
Figure 9: The visualization used in the Reward + Alignment + Visualization feedback condition.
This shows how the preferences over trajectories differ between the domain expert and the reward
function.
Towards Improving Reward Design in RL: A Reward Alignment Metric for RL Practitioners
(a) Modified NASA TLX survey given to participants
after each condition.
(b) Short answer survey given to participants after
each condition.
Figure 10: Condition Experience Surveys.
(a) Final multiple choice survey given to participants
to compare their experiences across the conditions.
(b) Final short answer survey given to participants to
compare their experiences across the conditions.
Figure 11: Condition Comparison Surveys.
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
Next, in Tables 4 and 5, we present the reward functions used in the human-subject study. In the
study, the reward functions in the REWARD FUNCTION 1 column were compared with the corre-
sponding reward functions in the REWARD FUNCTION 2 column. We report the mean final return
and the area under the curve (AUC) (both calculated from the evaluation metric), along with the stan-
dard deviation (STD). Note that the reward functions in both tables are identical; the only distinction
is the metric being displayed (e.g., return or AUC).
REWARD FUNCTION 1 FINAL RETURN REWARD FUNCTION 2 FINAL RETURN
(-0.9, -0.7, -0.4, 1.1) 39.138 ± 38.619 (-1, 0, 0.5, 1) 30.832 ± 43.009
(-3.7, 0.0, -3.1, 5.1) 33.495 ± 43.280 (-3.0, 1.5, 3, 5.0) 1.079 ± 0.319
(-0.9, -0.7, -0.4, 1.1) 39.138 ± 38.619 (-0.05, 0.2, 1.0, 1.0) 1.608 ± 7.617
(-3.6, 0.0, -3.1, 5.4) 35.485 ± 43.423 (-5.8, 1.2, 3.6, 5.8) 1.555 ± 4.537
(0, 0, 10, 10) 49.709 ± 34.312 (-0.05, 0.2, 1.0, 1.0) 1.608 ± 7.617
(-5.0, 0, 3.25, 5.0) 31.582 ± 43.205 (-5.0, 1.5, 3.25, 5.0) 1.225 ± 0.560
(-0.5, -0.5, 10.0, 10.0) 51.755 ± 36.960 (-0.05, 0.2, 1.0, 1.0) 1.608 ± 7.617
(-0.4, -0.5, 0.0, 1.0) 44.338 ± 41.750 (-0.2, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0) 1.217 ± 4.485
(-5.0, 0.0, -2.5, 5.0) 29.738 ± 42.468 (-5.0, 1.5, 3.25, 5.0) 1.225 ± 0.560
(-1.0, -0.05, -0.25, 1.0) 37.488 ± 44.081 (-5.0, 1.5, 3.25, 5.0) 1.225 ± 0.560
(-3.75, 0.0, -3.0, 5.0) 33.127 ± 43.348 (-5.0, 1.5, 3.25, 5.0) 1.225 ± 0.560
(-1.0, -0.7, -0.5, 1.0) 35.772 ± 36.955 (-0.05, 0.2, 1.0, 1.0) 1.608 ± 7.617
Table 4: This table shows the reward functions being compared in the reward selection aspect of the
user study. We also report the mean final return ± STD.
REWARD FUNCTION 1 AUC REWARD FUNCTION 2 AUC
(-0.9, -0.7, -0.4, 1.1) 240041.894 ± 278901.770 (-1, 0, 0.5, 1) 203405.861 ± 293167.199
(-3.7, 0.0, -3.1, 5.1) 219656.426 ± 296860.095 (-3.0, 1.5, 3, 5.0) 10619.689 ± 1872.266
(-0.9, -0.7, -0.4, 1.1) 240041.894 ± 278901.770 (-0.05, 0.2, 1.0, 1.0) 11390.661 ± 17391.171
(-3.6, 0.0, -3.1, 5.4) 227802.180 ± 296571.891 (-5.8, 1.2, 3.6, 5.8) 13451.407 ± 15346.038
(0, 0, 10, 10) 320899.367 ± 251997.175 (-0.05, 0.2, 1.0, 1.0) 11390.661 ± 17391.171
(-5.0, 0, 3.25, 5.0) 206036.191 ± 295113.945 (-5.0, 1.5, 3.25, 5.0) 11585.087 ± 3764.687
(-0.5, -0.5, 10.0, 10.0) 349167.541 ± 281517.767 (-0.05, 0.2, 1.0, 1.0) 11390.661 ± 17391.171
(-0.4, -0.5, 0.0, 1.0) 284235.135 ± 304976.538 (-0.2, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0) 10914.361 ± 15017.765
(-5.0, 0.0, -2.5, 5.0) 192430.552 ± 284398.848 (-5.0, 1.5, 3.25, 5.0) 11585.087 ± 3764.687
(-1.0, -0.05, -0.25, 1.0) 254052.926 ± 304591.173 (-5.0, 1.5, 3.25, 5.0) 11585.087 ± 3764.687
(-3.75, 0.0, -3.0, 5.0) 216262.144 ± 295986.126 (-5.0, 1.5, 3.25, 5.0) 11585.087 ± 3764.687
(-1.0, -0.7, -0.5, 1.0) 217347.509 ± 256831.683 (-0.05, 0.2, 1.0, 1.0) 11390.661 ± 17391.171
Table 5: This table shows the reward functions being compared in the reward selection aspect of the
user study. We also report the mean AUC ± STD.
In an earlier version of the user study, two participants had a slightly different UI design. The
differences included some variations in the wording of the instructions. We also did not include a
game-play session that allowed user control in the domain. Additionally, we did not ask participants
whether they trusted the domain expert or the information being provided to them. There were also
minor changes in the reward functions considered. Initially, we had a set of 13 pairs of reward
functions, from which we sampled 12 per participant. However, for simplicity in data analysis, we
decided to remove one pair. We also replaced one reward function pair with another, to make the
reward functions being compared more distinct.
C Proofs
Lemma C.1. Given the infinite-horizon setting, if the expected returns under reward function r′ are
a positive linear transformation of the expected returns under reward function r, with respect to all
Towards Improving Reward Design in RL: A Reward Alignment Metric for RL Practitioners
trajectory distributions, then the preference ordering over any two trajectory distributions ηi and ηj
remains unchanged. Formally:
Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )] = αEτ ∼η [Gr (τ )] + β =⇒

ηi ≿
(r,γ)
ηj ⇐⇒ ηi ≿
(r′,γ)
ηj

∀ηi, ηj ,
where α > 0 and β are constants and the expectations Eτ ∼η [Gr (τ )] and Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )] are taken
over the same trajectory distributions.
Proof. Let ηi, ηj be arbitrary trajectory distributions. Without loss of generality, assume that
ηi ≿
(r,γ)
ηj From Definition 3, this implies:
ηi ≿
(r,γ)
ηj ⇐⇒ Eτ ∼ηi [Gr (τ )] ≥ Eτ ∼ηj [Gr (τ )]
Define the difference in expected returns under r as:
∆i,j G(r) .
= Eτ ∼ηi [Gr (τ )] − Eτ ∼ηj [Gr (τ )] (C.1)
Now, consider the transformation of the expected return under r′:
Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )] = αEτ ∼η [Gr (τ )] + β,
where α > 0 and β are constants. Define the corresponding difference under r′:
∆i,j G(r′) = Eτ ∼ηi [Gr′ (τ )] − Eτ ∼ηj [Gr′ (τ )] (C.2)
Substitute the expressions for Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )], we get:
∆i,j G(r′) =

αEτ ∼ηi [Gr (τ )] + β

−

αEτ ∼ηj [Gr (τ )] + β

Simplify the terms and notice that β cancels out. We obtain:
∆i,j G(r′) = α∆i,j G(r)
Now, consider the two cases:
Case 1: ηi ≻
(r,γ)
ηj
This means ∆i,j G(r) > 0. Since α > 0, we have:
∆i,j G(r′) = α∆i,j G(r) > 0
As α is a positive constant, we conclude: ηi ≻
(r′,γ)
ηj .
Case 2: ηi ∼
(r,γ) ηj
This means ∆i,j G(r) = 0. Apply the transformation to obtain:
∆i,j G(r′) = α · 0 = 0
Thus, ηi ∼
(r′,γ) ηj
Since both cases preserve the preference ordering, we conclude:
ηi ≿
(r,γ)
ηj ⇐⇒ ηi ≿
(r′,γ)
ηj
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
Lemma C.2. [Necessity] In the infinite horizon setting, if two trajectory distributions ηi ∈ H(μi)
and ηj ∈ H(μj ) have different start-state distributions (μi̸ = μj ), then there exists a potential
function Φ such that:
ηi ≿
(r,γ)
ηj and ηi ≺
(r′,γ)
ηj .
Proof. Let ηi ∈ H(μi) and ηj ∈ H(μj ) be arbitrary trajectory distributions that have different start-
state distributions (μi̸ = μj ). Without loss of generality assume that ηi ≿
(r,γ)
ηj . From Definition
(3), this implies that:
Eτ ∼ηi [Gr (τ )] ≥ Eτ ∼ηj [Gr (τ )]
We now analyze how the expected return changes under the potential-shaped reward function r′.
From Equation (4.4) we have
Eτ ∼ηi(τ )[Gr′ ] = Eτ ∼ηi(τ )[Gr (τ )] − Es0∼μi [Φ(s0)] , (C.3)
Eτ ∼ηj (τ )[Gr′ ] = Eτ ∼ηj (τ )[Gr (τ )] − Es0∼μj [Φ(s0)] . (C.4)
Next, we define ∆i,j G(r), ∆i,j G(r′):
∆i,j G(r) .
= Eτ ∼ηi [Gr (τ )] − Eτ ∼ηj [Gr (τ )] (C.5)
∆i,j G(r) .
= Eτ ∼ηi [Gr′ (τ )] − Eτ ∼ηj [Gr′ (τ )] (C.6)
Substitute Equations (C.3) and (C.4) into Equation (C.6) to obtain ∆i,j G(r′):
∆i,j G(r′) =

Eτ ∼ηi(τ )[Gr (τ )] − Es0∼μi [Φ(s0)]

−

Eτ ∼ηj (τ )[Gr (τ )] − Es0∼μj [Φ(s0)]

Rearrange terms and substitute in the equation for ∆i,j G(r), Equation (C.5):
∆i,j G(r′) =

Eτ ∼ηi(τ )[Gr (τ )] − Eτ ∼ηj (τ )[Gr (τ )]

−

Es0∼μi [Φ(s0)] − Es0∼μj [Φ(s0)]

= ∆i,j G(r) −

Es0∼μi [Φ(s0)] − Es0∼μj [Φ(s0)]

(C.7)
Now we show that there exists a potential-based shaping function that will invert the preference
ordering over trajectory distributions ηi, ηj , that is ∃Φ : S → R such that ηi ≺
(r′,γ)
ηj .
From Definition 3, it follows that:
ηi ≺
(r′,γ)
ηj ⇐⇒ ∆i,j G(r′) < 0
This provides the necessary condition for the existence of such a shaping function. Now let ∆i,j Φ
be defined as:
∆i,j Φ .
= Es0∼μi [Φ(s0)] − Es0∼μj [Φ(s0)] (C.8)
Combine Equations (C.7) and (C.8) to get:
∆i,j G(r′) = ∆i,j G(r) − ∆i,j Φ
where ∆i,j G(r) > 0, since ηi ≿
(r,γ)
ηj . Now it is clear that:
∆i,j G(r′) < 0 ⇐⇒ ∆i,j Φ > ∆i,j G(r)
Towards Improving Reward Design in RL: A Reward Alignment Metric for RL Practitioners
We now provide an example of a potential-based shaping function for which ∆i,j Φ > ∆i,j G(r). To
begin, let us partition the state space S into two subsets: (1) the set of states that are more probable
under μi and (2) those that are more probable under μj , denoted as Sμi>μj and Sμi≤μj , respectively:
Sμi>μj = {s|s ∈ S, μi(s) > μj (s)} (C.9)
Sμi≤μj = {s|s ∈ S, μi(s) ≤ μj (s)} (C.10)
Next, we define the potential-based shaping function Φ : S → R as a piecewise function, which
takes the following form:
Φ(s) =



∆i,j G(r)+ϵR
s∈Sμi>μj
μi(s)−μj (s) , if s ∈ Sμi>μj
0 if s ∈ Sμi≤μj
(C.11)
where ϵ ∈ R, ϵ > 0. For this shaping function, we define the difference in expected values as:
∆i,j Φ .
= Es0∼μi [Φ(s0)] − Es0∼μj [Φ(s0)]
We can express the expectation in integral form and rearrange the terms:
=
Z
s∈S
μi(s)Φ(s) −
Z
s∈S
μj (s)Φ(s)
=
Z
s∈S
μi(s) − μj (s)Φ(s)
Decompose the integral over the two partitions defined in Equations (C.9) and (C.10). Notice thatR
s∈Sμi≤μj
μi(s) − μj (s)Φ(s) goes to 0 by Equation (C.11):
=
Z
s∈Sμi>μj
μi(s) − μj (s)Φ(s) +
Z
s∈Sμi≤μj
μi(s) − μj (s)Φ(s)
=
Z
s∈Sμi>μj
μi(s) − μj (s)Φ(s)
Move Φ(s) outside of the integral as it is a constant by Equation (C.11) and simplify:
= ∆i,j G(r) + ϵ
R
s∈Sμi>μj
μi(s) − μj (s)
Z
s∈Sμi>μj
μi(s) − μj (s)
= ∆i,j G(r) + ϵ
Hence ∆i,j Φ = ∆i,j G(r) + ϵ > ∆i,j G(r).
Theorem C.3. Given the infinite-horizon setting, the Trajectory Alignment Coefficient is invariant
to positive linear transformations.
Proof. Let {ηi, ηj } ∈ υh(Dh) be an arbitrary pair of trajectory distributions compared in the human
preference dataset. Without loss of generality assume that ηr
i ≿ ηr
j . From Defintion (3), this implies
that
Eτ ∼ηi [Gr (τ )] ≥ Eτ ∼ηj [Gr (τ )].
We now analyze how the expected return changes under the reward function r′. The expected return
under the reward function r is:
Eτ ∼η [Gr (τ )] = Eτ ∼η
" ∞X
t=0
γtr(st, at, st+1)
#
(C.12)
Reinforcement Learning Journal 2025
and the expected return under the shaped reward function r′ is:
Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )] = Eτ ∼η
" ∞X
t=0
γtr′(st, at, st+1)
#
(C.13)
Substitute r′(s, a, s′) = α · r(s, a, s′) + β into Equation (C.13), we obtain:
Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )] = Eτ ∼η
" ∞X
t=0
γt(α · r(st, at, st+1) + β)
#
= α · Eτ ∼η
" ∞X
t=0
γtr(st, at, st+1)
#
+ Eτ ∼η
" ∞X
t=0
γtβ
#
Since β is a constant, the expectation simplifies as follows:
Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )] = α · Eτ ∼η [Gr (τ )] + β
∞X
t=0
γt
= α · Eτ ∼η [Gr (τ )] + β
1 − γ
As Eτ ∼η [Gr′ (τ )] is positive linear transformation of Eτ ∼η [Gr (τ )], we apply Lemma (C.1) to get:
ηi ≿
(r,γ)
ηj ⇐⇒ ηi ≿
(r′,γ)
ηj

Thus, from Equation (4.1) and Definition (5), we conclude that:
σTAC(Dh, Dr,γ ) = σTAC(Dh, Dr′,γ )
D Environment Details
We use a modified Hungry-Thirsty domain (Singh et al., 2009), see Figure 12. The agent’s start
state is randomly placed at the beginning of each episode, while the food and water locations are
randomly assigned per environment configuration (e.g., per run/seed). Lastly, reward functions take
the form:
r(hungry, thirsty) = a
r(hungry, not thirsty) = b
r(not hungry, thirsty) = c
r(not hungry, not thirsty) = d
Towards Improving Reward Design in RL: A Reward Alignment Metric for RL Practitioners
Figure 12: Hungry-Thirsty Environment